Mr. Speaker: The Taft-Hartley Act, as some have claimed, is not a slave labor bill in any sense. The Taft-Hartley Act, as some have claimed, does not destroy unions. It is not for that reason that we oppose it in this House.
We oppose it because we believe that the Taft-Hartley Act makes the government a vital, inept, and prejudiced participant in labor management relations throughout this country.
Our ambition in the committee has always been to write a bill that will last for many years, so that it will not be necessary to fight this battle every year in the House and Senate, and so that it will be possible for industrial relations to be carried on without the government pushing its stubby finger in every pie.
Our function is to protect the public interest, and the public interest is not involved in every labor dispute.
The Taft-Hartley Act since its inception has not vitally affected the opportunity of men and women to work for a decent wage. But its effect in time of depression could have been serious. Let me quote from an editorial in Business Week of December 18, 1948:
"Given a few million unemployed in America, given an administration in Washington which was not pro-union, and the Taft-Hartley Act conceivably could wreck the labor movement.
These are the provisions that could do it: (1) Picketing can be restrained by injunction; (2) Employers can petition for a collective bargaining election; (3) Strikers can be held ineligible to vote while the strike replacements cast the only ballots; and (4) if the outcome of this is a 'non-union' vote, the government must certify and enforce it.
Any time there is a surplus labor pool from which an employer can hire at least token strike replacements, these four provisions linked together can destroy a union."
The editorial might have added that one of the major defects of the Taft-Hartley Act was the chain reaction effect on the legislatures of various states in encouraging them to pass anti-labor legislation. When labor is faced with restraining legislation on an inter- and intra- state basis, its handicaps are formidable.
I have been asked to touch on two points in regard to the Lesinski Bill. One of the most satisfactory sections of the National Labor Relations Act of 1947 was the provision which enlarged the board and provided for panel boards to lessen its backlog. The Lesinski Bill has continued this reform. The back-load of the board in the past has been tremendous. It does little good for employers, employees or the government, if there is a six-month wait for a board decision. The grievance remains uncorrected during this period and lessens the chance for industrial peace.
On the other hand, the Lesinski Bill corrects one of the most unsatisfactory features of the Taft-Hartley Act in removing the ban on political contributions by unions. I have always felt that this was merely an attempt by the authors to remove themselves from danger from possible repercussions by unions. This provision has little in common with the rest of the bill and did not belong in it. This provision amended and expanded the Federal Corrupt Practices Act of 1925. The Legislative history of the Act of 1925 indicated it had a two-fold purpose: First, to prevent influence in elections which corporations were able to exercise through large financial contributing and, second, to prevent the use of commonly owned corporate funds for political purposes without the consent of stock-holders.
To compare the collective dues of union members to funds of corporations takes a vigorous imagination.
H. R. 2032 would, I believe, correctly restore the pertinent section of the Federal Corrupt Practices Act to the form in which such section was written prior to its amendment to include labor organizations. Since the section was completely amended by the Taft-Hartley Act it is necessary to provide for its reenactment upon repeal of such Act. The procedure prescribed by the proposed bill, I believe, is the simplest one to accomplish such reenactment.
I recommend to your consideration and support H. R. 2032.
