Your Excellency Mr. Boris Johnson, Prime Minister of the United 
Kingdom
Your Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United 
Nations.
Excllencies, Heads of States and Governments, 
It is my pleasure to be with you here to deliberate on climate, the 
issue that affects us all today. The most recent IPCC report indicated that 
enhancing climate action to reach the 1.5C goal has become a necessity 
that cannot be delayed.
In this context, I will focus today on the following points:
First: Egypt initiated several serious steps to implement a 
sustainable development model, with addressing climate change and 
adapting to its negative impacts at its heart, with the goal of governmentfinanced green projects reaching 50% of total projects by 2025, and 
100% by 2030. 
For example, renewable energy constitutes today about 20% of 
Egypt’s energy mix, with the aim of reaching 42% by 2035, in conjunction 
with rationalizing energy subsidies. In addition, Egypt is currently 
undergoing a shift to clean transport, through expanding its metro 
network, laying out new electric railway networks, incentivizing the use 
of electric cars, as well as laying the needed infrastructure. Furthermore, 
several new sustainable smart cities are currently being developed, canals 
are being lined all over the country to rationalize water use, in addition 
to implementing projects for the inclusive management of coastal regions.
To finance these projects, Egypt just recently issued green bonds 
worth 750 million US Dollars, and to put all these efforts into their proper 
institutional framework, Egypt’s new “National Climate Change 
Strategy 2050” has just been finalized, paving the way to updating our 
NDCs in a manner that would make the policies, goals and procedures 
therein supplementary to our development efforts and our COVID 
recovery plans, rather than hindering them.
Second: As much as Egypt is cognizant of its commitments, it is also 
aware of the challenges faced by all developing countries. I would like 
here to emphasize on the fact that developing countries’ abilities to 
deliver on their climate commitments is subject to the support these 
countries receive, especially with regards to climate finance, the corner 
stone for our countries’ ability to raise their ambition and enhance their 
action, in the context of the delicate balance of the Paris Agreement. This 
balance must be preserved to allow for all mitigation and adaptation 
efforts to move forward on equal footing.
We remain concerned over the gap between available finance and 
the actual needs of developing countries, added to the challenges faced by 
our countries to access this finance. To this effect, it is imperative that 
developed countries fulfill their pledge to provide 100 billion US Dollars 
annually to climate finance in developing countries, and we support the 
call by the UN Secretary-General to designate not less than half that 
finance to adaptation efforts, and the importance of starting consultations 
on the new post-2025 financial goal. 
Third: Despite not being responsible for the current climate crisis, 
Africa faces its most negative economic, social, political and security 
impacts. Nevertheless, African countries are an example of serious 
climate action insofar as its capabilities and the support it receives. To 
this effect, Egypt calls for a special treatment of the African Continent 
under the Paris Agreement, with respect to its special circumstances and 
the numerous challenges it faces. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am confident that the results of this summit will reflect our 
political commitment to addressing climate change and adapting to its 
negative impacts. I am also confident that this will resonate with our 
delegations as they embark on negotiating the issues on the Session’s 
agenda, motivating them to reach positive results. I would also like to 
welcome the “Glasgow Breakthrough” Agenda and the reports it will 
produce, and reiterate our support to the British presidency of COP 26. 
We intend to work with the UK in the weeks and months ahead leading 
to COP 27, which we look forward to host on behalf of the African 
Continent. We will work throughout our presidency towards enhancing 
global climate action and reaching the goals of the Paris Agreement, for 
the benefit of the peoples of Africa and the entire world. 
Thank you.
