Mr. President, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Climate change has truly become the greatest challenge to mankind. Extreme 
weather phenomena and sea level rise are seriously affecting the food and water security, 
the sustainable development, and even the survival of many countries and communities. 
This warning from nature compels us to put forward strong measures and act responsibly
without further delay at the global level. As this is a global issue, a global approach is 
required. As this issue affects every person, an inclusive approach is necessary.
Therefore, I wish to propose the following:
First, climate change response and the restoration of nature must become the 
highest priority in all development decisions. They must form the highest ethical standards 
for all levels, sectors, businesses and citizens. 
Science and technology must lead the charge, and financing must lend leverage to 
the transitioning of the development model towards a green, circular, sustainable, 
inclusive, and humanistic economy. All that we do must be nature-based and centered 
around people, for they are the actors and drivers of sustainable development, in order to
leave no one behind. 
Second, all countries need to make strong commitments on greenhouse emissions
reduction, grounded in the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
respective capacities and circumstances. Let me take this opportunity to call for justice 
and fairness in the fight against climate change. This is imperative to limit the global 
temperature increase. For its part, although we are a developing country that started 
Please check against delivery
industrialization only over the three decades ago, Viet Nam will capitalize on its advantage 
in renewable energy and take stronger measures to reduce greenhouse gas emission. To 
this end, we will make use of our own domestic resources, along with the cooperation and 
support of the international community, especially from the developed countries, in terms 
of finance and technology, including through mechanisms under the Paris Agreement, in 
order to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050.
Third, climate finance, technology transfer, and capacity-building play a critical 
role in ensuring the success of the Paris Agreement. Developed countries, being major 
emitters in the past in exchange for present economic prosperity, need to fully meet their 
existing financial commitments. At the same time, it is urgent for us to arrive at more 
ambitious financial targets for the post-2025 period.
Ladies and gentlemen,
As one of the countries worst affected by climate change, Viet Nam is making every 
effort to both respond to climate change and foster economic development to grow and 
ensure an ever-better life for its people, while contributing responsibly alongside the 
international community. We look forward to advancing cooperation with international 
partners through investment programs and projects, and sustainable development. 
President Ho Chi Minh, the hero of national liberaration and world’s man of culture, 
once said: “Unity, unity, great unity. Success, success, great success.” If we are to succeed 
in the global fight against climate change, global solidarity is the only way. Together we 
will discuss, work, and win. Our unity must stem from our will, awareness, and solutions, 
and endure as we make and execute plans, and ensure resources. Our historic 
commitments and actions will help preserve a green planet, a sustainable habitat, and 
lasting happiness for generations to come. 
Thank you very much.
