# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/boston-ma-19460614

At the outset tonight, I wish to extend my most sincere thanks to the hundreds of men and women from all walks of life who have taken an active interest in my efforts to give to the 11th Congressional District the representation in Washington which it deserves. The end of the long, hard road we have traveled together is now in sight. Let us be steadfast and untiring until our work is done.

To the thousands of voters from all parts of the district who have pledged their support of my candidacy, I say this.  Tuesday is our day. Rain or shine, we will fill the polling places and demonstrate once more that the people, and not the politicians, are the source of strength of our American democracy.

I have aspired to the office of your Congressman because I believe that my education, training, and experience in national and international affairs make me qualified to represent you.  During the global war just past I tried to serve my country with all the strength and devotion to duty at my command. As your Congressmen, I shall try to serve you in the same way.

During recent broadcasts, I have made public my position on what I consider to be the vital issues of this campaign. I have endorsed the housing legislation enacted by the Congress. But Acts of Congress do not build houses. The letter, and the spirit of these laws, must be implemented by vigorous action to see that the huge productive capacity of American industry is geared to produce, without red tape and delay, modern, permanent and low cost housing for our people. Those who experienced the hardship and sacrifices of war at home and abroad are worthy of the best homes we can provide. This is vital for the normal development of family life, the keystone of our American way of life. Here in the 11th district we have skilled manpower in abundance. I intend to see that we get our fair share of the materials and equipment with which to work.

I have urged, and will support, the development of the Port of Boston so that it may return to its rightful place among the seaports of the world. Decaying docks are symptoms of disease within our economy. What is needed is dynamic leadership. I offer that dynamic leadership to you.

Hand in hand, with our seaport will go our airport as a key to our industrial future. The "Hub of the Air Universe" must be more than a slogan; it must become a reality. Our seaport and airport are the outlets through which the products of our industries reach the markets of the world.  A busy, growing port means jobs for our men and women in mills, factories, and offices. A prosperous industrial economy means prosperity for our small businessmen and service establishments.

I intend to see that Massachusetts retains its place as a leading manufacturing center for our traditional products. I will join any efforts to encourage the location of new industries here. We have a backlog of skilled manpower second to none in the nation. We have the plant capacity and engineering know how. We have adequate capital. But dynamic leadership is needed to bring these elements together with new force and vitality. I offer that leadership.  

I will oppose with all my strength any attempt to transfer by means of subsidy or otherwise, the industries of Massachusetts and New England to any other section of the country. I will fight to the bitter end any effort to give other sections advantages in rail and water transportation at the expense of Massachusetts and New England.

Having lived and fought with our veterans in war, I feel that I know and understand their problems in peace. The G.I. Bill of Rights has made the government a sponsor for veterans who desire additional education. But this legislation will be an empty gesture if the gates of our schools and colleges remain closed because of inadequate facilities. These men have had three, four, and five years carved out of their lives; they cannot wait any longer to make themselves ready for useful lives. Facilities are needed immediately, and in this the federal government can and should cooperate with the states. Employers must respond by expanding opportunities for on-the-job training so that those who need to develop skills in the trades will have the chance to acquire those skills. 

For the veteran who requires hospitalization I have urged and will support legislation to improve and expand hospital facilities, and to obtain more doctors and nurses of finest professional caliber to staff them. 

These steps will mean less time spent in waiting for admission to hospitals, and less time in actual treatment without lowering its quality in any way.

For the disabled veteran who is at a competitive disadvantage in our economy, I shall ask that the government meet its obligations in full.  The processing of claims can be speeded up. The amount of compensation should be commensurate with the right of these men to live in comfort and dignity. The hospitalized and disabled veterans should be the primary concern of a grateful nation; they shall be my primary concern in Washington.

These undertakings, together with the normal operations of the Federal Government, will impose heavy tax burdens on the American people. But a prosperous America with growing production and a mounting national income can carry these burdens whether in the form of direct or hidden taxes. Unnecessary and wasteful expenditures in many departments of the government can be drastically reduced by careful scrutiny of appropriations. If waste can be cut down our national finances will be placed on a sound basis, and allow the government to carry forward its program to meet the great social needs of the nation. 

With regard to our relationships with other nations, I have advocated the maintenance of a strong army and navy to insure the peace which we have won at so tragic a cost.  As the most powerful nation on earth we must stand ready to assume the obligations which such a position entails. This means a willingness to cooperate with other nations and to compromise our differences; but it also means a readiness to oppose tyranny and oppression no matter under what form of government these evils choose to masquerade.

The United States is the hope of free people everywhere.  Let us not offer them a leadership that is weak and indecisive, ever ready to abandon moral principles. Let us rather show them a strong and vigorous America, firm in its convictions and unyielding in its principles – an America which will lead the world to peace with justice.

My position on all of these issues has been made clear throughout this campaign, and I have restated it tonight. But programs and platforms have been offered before, only to be abandoned as political expediency should dictate. A politician's pledge is good until the polls are closed on Election Day.

The watchword of this campaign has been "The new generation offers a leader." The new generation refers not to age, but to a state of mind. It embraces all those who are ready to throw off the shackles of the old line politicians, and reaffirm their faith in American democracy. I ask for your confidence and support, so that together we may give the 11th district sound and progressive representation instead of political opportunism. With a deep sense of sincerity and humility I promise to serve, in the Congress of the United States, all the people of the district.