# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/charlestown-ma-19491117

It is a great honor for me to join with you today in recommissioning the USS Cony as an experimental destroyer.

The Cony, like many of us here today, is a veteran of the last war. She rendered distinguished service in the Solomon Islands Campaign – the hardest and the most dangerous duty that destroyers encountered in the Pacific. The Cony won her battle stars in some of the great sea actions of World War II.

The Cony was built in Bangor, Maine. She was named for Joseph S. Cony, of Eastport, Maine – and her new commander is Lt. Commander John B. Mutty, who also hails from Bangor. A ship with that strong connection with the state of Maine – the state which has in the past sent great sailors and great ships down to the sea – is fortunate.

I believe that it also is a good symbol that there are many members of the crew from the other rugged New England states which border on the great Atlantic Ocean. And I am particularly pleased to see that there are some men from Bunker Hill.

Joseph Cony served with distinction in the War Between the States specializing in amphibian landings along the southern coast. His commanding officer once wrote of him "the manner in which my orders were carried out is highly creditable to Mr. Cony, who is, I beg leave to state, a good officer and seaman."

The S.S. Cony, as you can see, has had a complete renovation. Her original superstructure has been replaced. She has been given all of the latest equipment for her new role in anti-submarine warfare.

As submarines have become more effective – the job of the submarine hunter has become more difficult – more complicated. I know that in the difficult days to come the, USS Cony of the Fletcher Class, newly commissioned anti-submarine destroyer, will continue to carry on the highest traditions of the United States Navy.

I want to congratulate the officers and men who will serve on this ship.