# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/boston-ma-19490219

I appreciate very much the opportunity of being here with you this evening, at the Massachusetts Health Conference. Such a conference as this is both commendable and typical. Massachusetts has always been in the forefront in the battle for better health for its citizens.  The first state Department of Health was established by Massachusetts in 1869. And this venture, the first such state-wide meeting to be conducted throughout the country, is definite evidence that our leadership continues.

The interchange of ideas and the expert knowledge of all phases of the health problem which will come out of the panel sessions of this conference will without doubt go far in helping you attain your most excellent aim of improving health in Massachusetts in the next five years.

Naturally, as a representative from Massachusetts in Congress, I am vitally interested in the job of attaining for the citizens of our state the best possible standard of health. I feel, too, that it is natural for me as a congressman to be interested in and concerned about the health of all of our citizens.

That a national health crisis exists, there is no dispute. During World War II some five million men were declared unfit physically or mentally by Selective Service.

Recently, Oscar R. Ewing, the Federal Security Administrator, reported to the President that every year the country loses four million three hundred thousand man-years of work as a result of bad health. In short term sickness (those cases where sickness or injury causes absence from work of from one day to six months) it has been estimated that in the year 1947 when such sickness averaged six days per worker, the cost to the country in lost production and wages was at least five billion dollars. In loss of full production due to partial disability, the country’s estimated loss during the same year was eleven billion dollars; and the same loss of eleven billion dollars was suffered by the nation because of total disability cases.

Thus in one year the country suffered a total estimated loss of twenty-seven billion dollars in potential production and wages through sickness and partial and total disability – although the real loss cannot be measured in terms of dollars and production lost.

Worthy of note is the fact that this does not take into account the loss incurred in the nation because of premature death.

More than three thousand eight hundred deaths occur daily in the United States – about twenty-three per cent, or nearly nine hundred, are preventable.

These facts, in themselves alone, are staggering evidence of the existence of a monstrous health crisis and the resultant burden which it places on our country’s economic and general welfare structure. The recitation of these facts is a somber litany indeed.

The solution of these problems waits upon the solution of the related problems of shortages of doctors, nurses, technicians, attendants, medical schools, hospitals, research facilities, and the ever pressing shortage of funds to pay for the expensive services and techniques to heal the sick, and equally important and frequently neglected, to keep the well healthy.

The shortage of doctors is a well-known and much-bemoaned fact. We have about eighty per cent as many physicians as we need. In some places such as Boston, and New York and Washington, the doctors are concentrated, which leaves many areas of the country, notably some sections of the South, with thirteen hundred or fourteen hundred people for each physician; while we in Massachusetts have a doctor for each five hundred forty-seven persons; and while the District of Columbia has a doctor for every two hundred ninety-six people – an idyllic condition.

But even more serious is the shortage of all the other indispensable hospital and medical personnel. In talking with an official of one of our great medical institutions here in Boston, he disclosed that they have been forced to close down a great many of their beds because of the shortage of nurses.

With this grave situation here in Boston – perhaps the medical capital of this country – it takes little imagination to picture the conditions in the backwoods areas. Nursing is a difficult career. There is no forty hour week, and time and a half for over-time. But it has its reward, and more girls must be encouraged to enter this service.

All of this man and woman power shortage stems of course from the lack of sufficient medical schools, and training schools, and teaching hospitals.

The disorganization of local health agencies is a contributing factor to our general problem.

While thousands of state, city, town, and other political subdivisions provide health and medical services of some form, as do other thousands of voluntary health organizations and hospitals, it has been found according to the Ewing Report that there exists in such services a definite lack of organization and integration. And it seems to me singularly appropriate that this conference make recommendations for correction, which could serve as a model for the country over.

But of all the roots of the health problem there is no doubt that the crux is the inability of individuals to pay for adequate – repeat adequate – medical care.

Nothing has been discussed with more vigor than the solution to the problem by both the so-called radicals who favor the provisions of the Murray-Dingell-Wagner Bill and the so-called Stand-Pat Reactionaries who believe that the American Medical Association Journal is the gospel and Morris Fishbein the prophet.  Regardless of the position that you subscribe to in this struggle, the facts are immutable. Only about twenty per cent of the people in this country can afford all of the medical care they need. About fifty per cent of American families with annual incomes of three thousand dollars or less can hardly, or cannot at all, afford to pay for even routine medical attention. The other thirty per cent of our families either are required to make difficult sacrifices or to go into debt to pay the bills for serious illness, or to rely upon the generosity of doctors, hospitals, and local health services.

While the protagonists have debated the extent to which the government should intervene in the field of health, the government already has indicated its awareness of the problem, and in several different fields has intervened actively.

Certain executive departments have extended their operations into fields such as child health, maternity care, and related work.

In 1945 further evidence of Federal awareness was found in the introduction in the United States Senate of the much debated Murray-Wagner-Dingell National Health Bill, which provided for a compulsory health insurance system which would cover seventy-five to eighty per cent of our population. This bill, which failed in passing, was condemned by the American Medical Association, and many members of both political parties. Senators Taft, Smith, and Donnell submitted a substitute health bill, which proposed to coordinate the health functions of the federal government except those of the Army, Navy and the Veterans Administration, and to authorize about two hundred thirty million dollars annually in federal grants to states in order to enable them to provide comprehensive medical care for persons unable to pay for it.

While this was not acted upon either, the trend of Congressional thinking toward health was obvious.

Indeed the 79th Congress did authorize one of President Truman’s recommendations – federal aid to states for hospital construction – the Hill-Burton Act – providing for three hundred seventy-five million dollars to be allocated over a five year period to help states build hospitals.

The 80th Congress appropriated one hundred sixty-four million nine hundred thousand dollars in public health activities. Contract authorizations raised this to over two hundred seventy-five million dollars, and additional research in dentistry and heart disease was also authorized. Consequently we find that the scope of the public health service today is tremendously broadened, to the point that most medical research in certain fields conducted throughout the country is cleared and coordinate with it.

The growth of government interest in health is possibly best exemplified by the fact that for the year 1947 it expended a total of one billion nine hundred sixty-two million dollars for civilian health.

We are only beginning. Certainly in one field we are far behind. This country spends more than a billion dollars a year for research – mostly in industrial and military fields. Only about ten per cent of the total is allocated to medical and related research. Obviously, if there is one phase of medicine that must be vigorously expanded, it is medical research – for without it all hope of eradicating the degenerative diseases of old age – heart disease, cancer, and the other chronic diseases such as arthritis – must be abandoned. And certainly research in mental diseases must go forth on a far greater scale than is now planned. As people live longer, their lives must be made more pleasant, and they should be free, if possible, from those diseases that make old age a misery.  

There is another factor, too. This country will not be able to afford to build and maintain and staff, in the future, enough institutions to care for the people who may fall victims of these dread diseases.

It is, therefore, vital that the Federal government throw its resources behind the local groups in fighting the great battle for survival.

To quote the magazine America, "When a problem such as that of the nation’s health exceeds the power of individual or group action, intervention by the government becomes not merely justified, but morally imperative."

If our government is to intervene, and be truly effective and responsible, it must seek to retain for the doctor that vital freedom of action that has brought America to the forefront, while attempting to bring to the great masses of people the benefits of medicine. Local groups can be most beneficial in seeking to obtain this optimum condition. We must not forget, however, in being preoccupied with our search for better health through the benefits of medicine, the truth of the conclusions of the medical care section of the National Health Assembly.

"A medical care program by itself will not solve the health problems of the nation. It must be coordinated with all efforts directed toward providing the people with adequate housing, a living wage, continuous productive and creative employment under safe working conditions, satisfying recreation and such other measures as will correct conditions that adversely affect the physical, mental and social health of the people."