# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/braintree-ma-19491201

Abraham Lincoln defined the true role of government in a free economy in these words: "The function of government is to do for the people what they cannot do for themselves or cannot do so well in their separate and individual capacities."

I am sure that Jarvis Hunt and I are in agreement on this definition of the true function of government. But perhaps we differ on the way it is being interpreted in this year of 1949.

The twentieth century has seen a tremendous growth in the functions and the authority of the Federal Government. The growing interdependence of people and institutions – the growth of powerful organizations – the necessity for government to enter fields which private capital could not, led to new theories of governmental responsibility. The Great Depressions of the twentieth century made more and more people turn to the central authority for relief and protection.

With the tremendous radiating relationships – the interdependence of group with group – interest with interest – corporations with trusts – labor organizations with employers – each competing or impinging on the other – the function of government as a regulatory authority grew.

To what might be called the regulatory state was gradually added a wide variety of police powers applying in various forms to industrial production, trade, transportation, communication, banking, insurance, as they were involved in and affected interstate commerce.

And in recent years the service state has developed; based on a conception of government that made the state responsible to the citizen for more than police and fire protection – responsible in some degree to those who were unemployed due to the contractions of our economic system – responsible to those in some degree who were too old to work.

Once this new theory of social justice was accepted, the government began to play an increasingly large part in the lives of the people of this great Republic.

The welfare state – child of the Great Depression, sired by hard times and damned by the Republicans, came of age in the decade following President Roosevelt’s first inaugural. Now the theory of the welfare state is supported in some measure by both great parties. Now they both agree that the government must accept some responsibility for the welfare of the individual. The great battle of our time is how extensive this responsibility should be – over how it should be dealt with – over what the State and what the federal government should do. But there is little disagreement over the belief that this responsibility should be accepted.