# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/hull-ma-19491111

The First World War came to an end with dramatic suddenness. All through the hot summer, American soldiers had fought in battles which are now household words, Chateau Thierry, Meuse-Argonne, Belleau Woods, the Marne. The casualties were concentrated and they numbered over 300,000, so that when in the morning of November 11, 1918 peace came, every soldier combined a sense of relief that it was all over, with a deep grief that his comrades could not have lived to see that day. So Armistice Day has grown in significance, it has become part of the American tradition.  

In recent years on Armistice Day we have honored the dead of another war. Young men, many from Hull, wrote new names on the battle flags of this country. Africa in ’42, Sicily, Salerno, Anzio, China and the Hump, Corregidor, the Solomon Islands, the Coral Sea, Tarawa, Iwo Jima, Leyte and Okinawa. The battle flags now carry the Normandy Beach, the breakthrough, the Bulge, the Rhine and final victory. The battle flags carry names of cities and towns and islands that we had never heard of.

That was in truth a world war and there was hardly a place in the world that did not hold an American boy.

We are here today to pay these men and the men of the First World War, tribute, to acknowledge their sacrifices – to honor them. I do not think that any of us can help but get inspiration from this day. The memory of the men we knew, the memory of the men we did not know but who were united with us in a great cause, is strong with us today, and I think will be all of the days of our lives. I think it most appropriate that on this Armistice Day we are dedicating this great school. I do not think that there could be a more fitting memorial.

I hope that in this school, generations of Hull boys will be taught devotion to their country and respect for its institutions. I hope that they will be taught the bitter lesson of the last years that freedom is never secure – that each generation must be prepared to win it again.

And most of all, I hope that they will learn to honor the young men of Hull, who in every war since the Republic was formed, have gallantly given the last full measure of devotion for their country.