# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/lowell-ma-19491022

We are faced on this pleasant October evening with a world torn by devastation and struggle. We cling precariously to a cold peace, while all about can be heard the muffled drums of war. The battle is on all fronts. Even words like "democracy" and "freedom" have been captured and are enslaved by the enemy.

We have been attempting to keep Western Europe free by a series of actions based on the belief that Russian expansion can be contained. The Truman Doctrine as it applied to Greece and Turkey, the Marshall Plan, the Atlantic Pact, the Arms Aid Act, have all been part of the grand design to consolidate the 16 Western European nations into a buffer against the Russian advance.

While we have held our own in Europe by these desperate measures, our policy in the Far East has reaped the whirlwind. So concerned were our diplomats and their advisers with the imperfections of the democratic system in China after twenty years of war, and the tales of corruption in high places, that they lost sight of our tremendous stake in a non-communist China. They forgot that the independence of China and the stability of the national government were the fundamental objects of our Far Eastern policy.

The communist assault on the rest of Asia has already begun.

Here in America itself we are face to face with serious domestic problems. A cloud on the horizon, no bigger than a man’s hand – unemployment – is of great concern, for the prospect of mass unemployment is the spectre that haunts the capitalistic economy. The successful solution of this question is the major domestic problem of our times.

As Peter Drucker wrote recently in Harper’s Magazine: "Prevention of depression and chronic unemployment has become an absolute necessity for any industrialized country. Only if the citizen can be reasonably certain that he will not be cast out from society and be deprived of his effective citizenship by forces which he can neither control nor understand, can modern industrial society expect to be acceptable, to be rational, to be meaningful to its members."

That is certainly the philosophical basis for all that is being done to insure employment security.

It is gratifying to note that here in Massachusetts, which was especially hard-hit last spring by the contraction of our economy, we have seen a sharp reduction this fall in the number of those who are unemployed. While United States Employment Security Bureau figures based on claims filed under the State Unemployment Compensation Program in Massachusetts showed a total of about 152,000 for the week ending July 9th of this year, September 24th figures show a decline to 97,000; and October 1st figures a further decline to 89,000. This sharp decline in unemployment from July to October certainly is proof that the normal fall up-swing in business is occurring again this year.

The papers have been busy for the last few days in summing up the accomplishments and the failures of the first session of the Eighty-first Congress.

Some of its greatest successes, I believe, were in the field of international relations, where with bi-partisan support it made significant contributions to peace, with legislation such as the Atlantic Pact.

In the domestic field, I believe, our greatest success was in passing the Social Security Act through the house, which spreads the coverage of the old act over millions of new workers, and raises the amount that will come to them at the date of their retirement. This is a tremendous step forward in bringing security to all our people.

Another beneficial action was the raising of the minimum wage from 40 cents to 75 cents an hour. Certainly in these times of high prices, a wage of $30.00 for a forty hour week in a job that affects interstate commerce, is little enough.

We had great hopes of expanding the coverage of the minimum wage law, but we could not hope to win against the coalition that had gathered against us. The increase in minimum wage not only will help to build consumer purchasing power in this country, but in many cases will permit us in New England to compete on fairer terms with industries in the South, which have been able to undersell us successfully by having lower labor costs.

The biggest disappointment that comes in studying the record of this session of Congress was its failure to repeal the National Labor Relations Act of 1947 – known as the Taft-Hartley Bill. There was every reason to expect last November that it would be repealed. It had been written into the platform in Philadelphia; the President had spoken frequently about the importance of writing a new labor law in the campaign; the election in November had returned a House and Senate controlled by the Democrats. But the experience of the last nine months has shown that these hopes were premature. Congress refused to repeal the Taft-Hartley Act. Instead it nearly passed the Wood Bill – a carbon copy of the Taft-Hartley Act in nearly every aspect.

My own opinion is that if we are sincerely interested in bringing about labor peace in this country, the Taft-Hartley Act should be repealed. Government intervention, as the New York Times recently pointed out, should be held in the main to the minimum necessary to protect public welfare.

As it stands now, labor feels – and there is some basis for that feeling – that the National Labor Relations Act of 1947 was written into law by those who sought to limit severely many of labor’s legitimate activities.

As long as this act is on the books industrial relations cannot be harmonized.

The Taft-Hartley Act has not, on the whole, vitally affected the highly organized unions of New England, but it has had a severe effect on the attempts to organize unions in the South. In addition, many states, particularly in that area, have written stringent labor laws into their books, as a result of Congress' passing the National Labor Relations Act of 1947.

It seems to me that there are 4 provisions of the Taft-Hartley Act which could severely damage a union if there were a large pool of unemployed in this country.

According to Business Week of December 18, 1948, and I quote: "These are the provisions that could do it: (1) Picketing can be restrained by injunction; (2) Employers can petition for a collective bargaining election; (3) Strikers can be held ineligible to vote while the strike replacements cast the only ballots; and (4) If the outcome of this is a nonunion vote, the government must certify and enforce it.

"Any time there is a surplus labor pool from which an employer can hire at least token strike replacements, these four provisions linked together can destroy a union."

Despite the set-back in this Congress in the fight for the repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act, the President has reiterated his determination to continue the fight. Those members of Congress who are interested in more equitable management-labor relations will fight with him.

We are faced with bitter days, but as General Eisenhower stated Thursday before the Armed Services Committee of the House: "United we can stand against the world."

America has gone through difficult days before, but we have always emerged triumphant. As we go forward to meet the tests of our times, we can see ahead of us the promised lands of peace and freedom.