# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/washington-dc-19510709

The Defense Production Act Amendments
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the defense production bill in the form it has come before the House is wholly inadequate to accomplish the vital task of stabilizing prices, wages, and rents.

I am opposed especially to the following provisions of the bill:

First. The prohibition of further rollbacks of beef prices.

Second. The authorization of the 20-percent increase in rent over the 1947 maximum rent, plus the same 20-percent increase on all allowably adjusted increases since 1947.

Third. The amendment to the bill, to be offered by the Education and Labor Committee, which would seriously hamper the Wage Stabilization Board’s tasks of stabilizing wages in a just and reasonable manner.

I am also opposed to these shortcomings of the bill:

First. Its failure to require that public utilities and common carriers, which are not regulated by state, city or other municipal body, be subject to Federal price control. These entirely uncontrolled utilities and public carriers have raised their prices so high that many producers have asked the Office of Price Stabilization for price increases to be passed along to the public.

Second. Its failure to authorize the Office of Price Stabilization to license businesses selling articles subject to price control. Ex-President Hoover has stated that this licensing power is essential if price control is to be truly effective.

Third. Its failure to meet more realistically the food-price problem caused by the present law’s provision that no price ceiling may be set on agricultural products below the so-called parity level.

Fourth. Its failure to permit more effective control over commodity speculation and profiteering.

My opposition to the prohibition of further roll-backs on beef prices is based on these facts. When the Office of Price Stabilization announced the first beef roll-back on April 28 beef cattle prices were 152 percent of parity. This first roll-back, amounting to 10 percent, went into effect on May 20, but was not felt at the consumer’s retail level.

In order to allow the meat industry to make adjustments to the change, the next announced roll-backs were staggered over several months. Roll-backs of 4½ percent each were scheduled for August 1 and October 1, at which time the consumer would finally obtain some relief from increasingly high beef prices.

Even after the scheduled October roll-backs beef prices would be higher than the highest ever paid before Korea, and would stand at 125 percent of parity.

Obviously, the roll-backs on beef would be reasonable and in the interest of the American consumer. What is more, they would be fair to the beef producers.

The provision in the present bill which prohibits these roll-backs is, in effect, a favor to a special-interest group, which is already being well taken care of by the Government. It should be stricken from the bill.

Prohibition of roll-backs will be a severe blow to our attempts to meet the threat of inflation, for increased food prices will result in demands for higher wages and the never-ending consequences of price-wage spirals.

The 20-percent increase in rents above 1947 maximum rents provided for in this bill, although seeming reasonable, would but add to the burden of those Americans already most heavily burdened by the present high cost of living – the lower- and middle-income rent payers.

In my own native city of Boston, for example, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says the average rent increase from 1941 till this year amounts to 25.7 percent. The average percentage increase in 34 large cities in the country amounts to 28.7 percent, the Bureau of Labor Statistics also tells us.

What harm, then, say the proponents of this bill’s 20 percent authorized increase over 1947 rents, can be done to the rent payers of the Nation if the average increase is already above 20 percent? The bill provides, they say, that any rent which has already been increased by 20 percent since 1947 will not be affected.

In checking into the statistics given by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, however, I have found these to be the facts in Boston – and housing officials have assured me that Boston is typical of the other large metropolitan cities in the country:

There are approximately 250,000 rental units out of the total 415,000 dwelling units in the Boston area. Of these 250,000 about 25,000 were never under rent control. Of the remaining 225,000 units, about 100,000 signed the 15 percent rent increase lease authorized a couple of years ago by the Congress. Some 40,000 individual rent increase adjustments have been made.

The only general increase that has been granted in Boston since 1947 was an 8 percent general tax increase allowance.

Thus, it is apparent that, taking duplication of those landlords receiving the 15 percent increase leases and those who have received individual adjustments into consideration, upward of half of Boston’s controlled rent payers have been increased only the 8 percent granted in the general tax increase.

Therefore, about 100,000 Boston tenants will, if the bill’s rent-control provision stand, have their rent increased by 12 percent.

I am bitterly opposed to such a rent increase at this time when we are struggling to keep the cost of living down. Consequently, I shall offer an amendment to the present bill cutting down the authorized increase from 20 percent to 10 percent.

The effect of the proposed amendment to abolish the existing Wage Stabilization Board and substitute a new board would be to strip the Board of its responsibility for day to day administration of wage stabilization controls and to confine and limit its jurisdiction.

The proposed amendment rolls back most of the dispute settlement authority granted by Executive Order 10233; and more, it freezes the authority of the President to deal with national industrial relations problems as they arise. It would prohibit any use of the Board in the solution of national industrial relations problems.

This bill, in its present form, will not do the job that vitally needs to be done. If passed in its present form, it increases the responsibility which the Congress and the President must assume for failing to meet the problems of inflation with the vigor that was required. The responsibility of the President rests with his failure to request full and complete powers to limit the rise in the cost of living at the beginning of the hostilities in Korea, and with his delay in using the limited powers granted to him.

The responsibility of the Congress rests with its failure to accept the recommendations of Mr. Baruch a year ago, and with its willingness – as in this present bill – to listen to the siren call of the special interest.

What has happened in the past year to the cost of living, when the full impact of the defense effort upon the economy has not been felt, is indicative of the necessity for strong action on all fronts in this war against inflation.

The facts are plain:

Prices
For the month ending May 15, according to the most recent Labor Department Consumer’s Price Index, the cost of living reached an all-time high of 185.4 percent over the 1935-39 average.

The following breakdown gives the comparative figures for May 15 of last year; June 15, 1950, just prior to the outbreak of the Korean war; and May 15, 1951:

 	
May 15, 1950

June 15, 1950

May 15, 1951

 	
Percent

Percent

Percent

All items

169.3

170.2

185.4

Food

199.8

203.1

227.4

Apparel

184.7

184.6

204.0

Rent

130.6

130.9

135.4

Fuel, electricity, and refrigeration

138.8

139.1

143.6

House furnishings

185.0

184.8

212.6

Miscellaneous

155.1

154.6

165.0

There has thus been almost a 10-percent rise in living costs since the Korean War started, while there has been nearly a 20-percent rise in wholesale prices during the same period.

Wages
The average weekly earnings for all manufacturing workers was estimated for April of this year to be $64.22.  In 1939 the average earning was $23.88; in April of 1950, $56.93; and in June 1950 – Korea month – $58.85.

The latest estimate of the average weekly earnings for retail-trade workers in March of this year was $48.95.  A year ago, March, it was $46.26, and for Korea month it was $48.06.

For manufacturing workers, then, the figures show a rise in wages of about 9 percent since Korea; for retail-trade workers a rise of less than 2 percent since Korea. This indeed is clear proof that the workingman, including the white-collar worker, has lagged well behind the increase in the cost of living.

Credit
Prices and wages are commonly thought to be the only important elements leading to inflation. But there is another factor which has greatly added to the acceleration of the inflation we face, namely, large-scale borrowing from banks. As a matter of fact many of the expert economists believe the uncurbed expansion of bank credit is the greatest danger we face today.

From April of last year when bank loans totaled $43,800,000,000 through April of this year there was an increase of over $10,000,000,000 in commercial-bank credit, with the April estimate of total loans at $54,400,000,000.

It is estimated that business loans expanded during that period by some $5,000,000,000 and that real estate and consumer loans expanded about $2,500,000,000 each.

Of the $5,000,000,000 business loans, although no factual data are available, it is considered improbable by Government officials that over a small percentage went into direct defense production. It is commonly agreed that the overwhelming portion of this $5,000,000,000 went into post-Korea share buying and inventory build-ups by nondefense business.

Profit
Corporate profits for the year 1950 amounted to $40,500,000,000 before taxes and $22,400,000,000 after taxes. For the first quarter of this year they have been running at an estimated rate of $51,000,000,000 before and $24,300,000,000 after taxes. In 1939 they amounted to $6,500,000,000 before and $5,000,000,000 after taxes. In 1949 corresponding figures for profits were $27,600,000,000 and $17,000,000,000.

The steady rise in profits is clearly evident in the figures showing at what annual rates, seasonally adjusted, they were running for each quarter of last year and for the first quarter of this year:

(In billions of dollars)

Before taxes

After taxes

1950:

First quarter

29.2

16.0

 	
Second quarter

37.4

20.9

 	
Third quarter

46.4

25.8

 	
Fourth quarter

50.8

28.5

1951:

First quarter

51.0

24.3

Thus we see that corporate profits for the first quarter of 1951 surpassed those of any previous period. After taxes, which hit hard in the first quarter of the year, they were $8,000,000,000 more than in the first quarter of 1950, a rise of 50 percent.

All of these elements, prices, wages, credit, and profits, have had their effect on the spiraling of costs and the progressive weakening of the value of money we call inflation.

After the invasion of South Korea by the Korean Communists, and the resultant spurt in our own defense efforts, it was unmistakably clear that the Government would have to take steps both to adequately build up our Armed Forces and also to insure the stability of our national economy. Congress as a result voted moneys to build up our Army, Navy, and Air Force, and likewise passed the Defense Production Act.

I think it is safe to say that our defense forces’ build-up, except for the fact that defense-item prices have soared tremendously, has progressed fairly well since then, although I personally feel the military goals have been set too far ahead.  The role played by inflation in our defense build-up is evident in the report of the Department of Defense to the Joint Economic Committee, which states that – 

"In terms of the number of guns that can be procured with available funds, the effect of inflationary prices increase is almost the same as if half the guns on order had been destroyed by enemy action."
I know it is eminently safe to say that, in the fight against inflation and an unsound economy, the Government has failed, and failed badly, in the eyes of every segment of the American public.

Consequently, it is well to consider at this time the weapons the Government has used in this fight – weapons which so far have proven so ineffectual. For if the economy of the country is so riddled with the symptoms of inflation today when our defense mobilization is taking but about a 10-percent bite out of our national production, it is clear that improved weapons must be forged as we approach 1952 when mobilization will be biting an estimated 20 percent out of our national production.

Title IV of the Defense Production Act, passed into law last September states:

"It is the intent of Congress to provide authority necessary to achieve the following purposes in order to promote the national defense:  To prevent inflation and preserve the value of the national currency; to assure that defense appropriations are not dissipated by excessive costs and prices; to stabilize the cost of living for workers and other consumers and the costs of production for farmers and businessmen; to eliminate and prevent profiteering, hoarding, manipulation, speculation, and other disruptive practices resulting from abnormal market conditions or scarcities; * * * to protect the national economy against future loss of needed purchasing power by the present dissipation of individual savings; and to prevent a future collapse of value."
Title VI authorized the President, through the Federal Reserve System, to exercise control and to regulate consumer and real-estate credit.

Up to today, not one of these objectives has been realized. Inversely, indeed, if the act had said that it was "the intent of Congress to create inflation, to dissipate defense appropriations through excessive costs and prices, to increase the cost of living for consumers, and so forth," conditions today would indicate that the law had worked perfectly.

The chief weapon the Defense Production Act put into the President’s hands to achieve the objectives of the law was, of course, the authority to control prices and wages.

The ineffectiveness of these controls is apparent today. While it is true that the Economic Stabilization Agency needed time to get going after being set up last fall, no one or no group today pretends that the purposes for which it was established have been, to any consequential degree, achieved.

Certainly the Congress expected and the American people looked for more concrete results from the Government in the fight for economic stabilization than have been achieved up to now.

And yet the Congress itself and many private American citizens are not entirely innocent of contributing to the lack of results.

For example, one of the most controversial provisions of the Defense Production Act which Congress wrote into it is the protection of parity guaranties to farmers.

We have seen from figures quoted earlier, while the over-all cost of living rose about 9 percent in the past year; food prices have come up about 16 percent – and more than 11 percent since the Korean war started. Food is the No. 1 item in the workingman’s budget. Despite this fact, the present defense production law includes a provision that price controls or ceiling cannot be imposed on any agricultural commodity below the highest of either, first, the parity prices for such commodity; or second, the highest price received by producers during the period May 24, 1950 to June 1951.

When the first price freeze was put on back in January, the majority of farm commodities were below parity. Of the one-hundred-and-sixty-odd farm products listed by the Agriculture Department, only 24 were selling above parity at the time.  The prices of these were frozen and they included beef, cotton, wool, rice, cottonseed, lambs, sheep, and veal calves. The long list of those selling below parity included chickens, eggs, milk, potatoes, citrus fruits, sugar, and many vegetables.

While there has been a rise toward parity by some of these latter products, most of the foods which were under parity in January, although some have risen, have still not reached the parity figure, and consequently we can expect further price increases in food.

It is bad enough to think that Congress allowed in the production law all of these food prices to rise to a fixed a parity point. If the matter ended there, perhaps the provision guaranteeing parity prices might be justified for the farmers’ stability.

It does not, however, end there. For, indeed, there is no such thing as a fixed parity. As prices of farm products rise to a certain parity point, naturally there is a rise in food prices and a resultant need for higher wages by the consumer. This means, in turn, that the prices farmers have to pay go up – necessitating the establishment of a new higher parity price for their own products.

Many leading economists and governmental officials have been greatly disturbed by this vicious inflationary circle caused by the parity provision, but have run up against the very powerful farm bloc both throughout the country and in the Congress itself.

The retention of this parity guaranty in the price-control set-up will no doubt negate pretty completely the effect of the system announced by the Price Stabilizer of mark-up dollar-and-cent ceilings for food items that account for 60 percent of the Nation’s food budget. For in the order setting up this system whereby a grocer could, for example, charge 25 percent above his cost for a can of tomatoes, there was nothing to bar further higher farm prices and the accompanying rise in retail food prices.

Moreover, there is the present bitter opposition to any roll-back of prices on farm products.

Besides the parity problem, other obstacles in the way of price stabilization have been profiteering and hoarding, Private American citizens are the profiteers and hoarders.

All in all, it is obvious that controls on prices have been flexible and soft.

The wage-control policy of the Government has, on the other hand, been comparatively inflexible and hard. The only exceptions to the general wage freeze ordered last January have been, first, to allow wages to rise up to 10 percent over January 1950 levels; and, second, to authorize escalator clauses – which automatically adjust wages to changes in the cost-of-living index – if they were in contracts before January 26, 1951.

Just as governmental price controls have been, credit controls too have been, in large measure, soft and pseudo-disciplinary.

It is true that since the Defense Production Act was passed, the Government has imposed certain credit controls – on bank credit, on real-estate credit, and on installment buying. But, most economists hold the firm conviction that not enough has been done in this field.

We have seen earlier the reason for this conviction – the fact that from last April through April of this year commercial-bank credit has risen $10,600,000,000 to an all-time high of almost $54,400,000,000.  Consumer credit alone today amounts to almost $20,000,000,000.  The resultant increase of available purchasing power, of course, added to the inflationary trend. It is obvious, then, that particularly in the matter of bank credit, the dam which was constructed to keep back the floodwaters of easy money proved dangerously porous.

In Government itself we witnessed a few months ago a disagreement between the Federal Reserve System and the Treasury Department over this vital curbing of credit, which, while it has been since resolved, did much damage to our economy.

The Federal Reserve Board, as authorized by the provisions of the Defense Production Act, did take steps to raise reserve requirements, impose controls of a selective nature on installment buying – regulation W – and on housing credit – regulation X. On the other hand, it, in accord with fixed interest rates set by the Treasury Department, bought – or had to buy – United States Government securities from the commercial banks. The banks in turn have used the money from the sale of these securities to extend credit. According to reserve requirements, moreover, a bank can lend five or six times the amount of money received from the Federal Reserve in payment for the Government securities it sells. Thus we see that, in a period when it is imperative that credit curbs be applied, the Federal Reserve support of Government securities created a new reservoir of available credit.

The figures bear this out – and show that the Federal Reserve bought over $3,000,000,000 of Government securities during the last half of 1950, and that, for the same period, total outstanding credit increased over $4,000,000,000.

Likewise, figures show that during 1950 the commercial banks steadily increased their sale of Government securities and at the same time raised their loans by some 20 percent.

The Treasury opposed the view of the Federal Reserve that interest rates on Government bond issues should be raised because it would result in an increase in cost to them in financing the public debt, now standing, at $255,000,000,000. 

The Treasury-Federal Reserve dispute was resolved in a compromise. President Truman in his memorandum of February 25 suggested the advisability, first, of limiting private lending through voluntary actions by private groups; and, second, of providing the Federal Reserve with powers to impose additional requirements of banks. Subsequently the Treasury Department announced the issuance of new, nonmarketable bonds at a 2¾ interest rate. But, as stated in the minority views in the Joint Economic Committee’s report, while final compromise and cooperative evolution of a program is always advantageous, no one should overlook the great damage resulting to the economy of the country from the months-long delay in the Treasury and Federal Reserve agreement.

Of all the elements involved in today’s economic instability, one of them, corporate profits, has received probably less attention by the public than the others. While prices and wages have increased at a reasonably comparable rate, about 10 percent, we have noted that corporate profits increased almost about 50 percent, after taxes, from the end of June 1950 through the first quarter of 1951.

It is true that excess-profits legislation was passed last December by the Congress, but obviously it is not enough.

One of the economists participating in a panel before the Joint Economic Committee, Dr. Richard Musgrave, professor of economics at the University of Michigan, told the committee he felt that the present excess-profits tax law was "really a corporation income tax in excess-profits-tax guise.  I do not see much sense in an excess-profits tax which, if I read it correctly, tells a fellow that he must pay excess-profits rates when his profits begin to exceed the credit, but that he may move back to close to the regular rate after his excess profits come to exceed one-half of his income.  The essence of an excess-profits tax is that you pay a higher rate if your profits are more excessive."  And he stated that he doubted that "we would be satisfied with the present tax for long."

The bill recently passed by the House tightens up the excess-profit law somewhat, but it might well be that circumstances will demand even more stringent action against excessive defense profits.

I believe and recommend, therefore, that, if inflation is to be stopped and a sane form of economic stability restored, the Federal Government must:

First, Increase taxes: To pay as we go the mobilization program must be paid in great measure by equitable increased taxes both on personal income and on corporate and by excise taxes. The new tax bill is doubtlessly a correct step in this direction.

Second.  Formulate a strong and consistent across-the-board system of controls over rents, prices, wages, credit, and profits: This will necessitate some below-parity revision of the current parity provision in the Defense Production Act. Profits must be controlled through a new and strengthened excess-profits tax.

Third.  Reduce nondefense governmental expenditures to a point where the budget can be balanced even it this necessitates the repeal or modification of existing laws or the suspension of existing Congress-approved authorization, for example the total of about $43,000,000,000 already authorized by law for nondefense construction.

Fourth.  Encourage savings by issuing for public sale purchasing-power bonds: As recently suggested by Professor Slichter, such bonds would guarantee the holder that he would get the same purchasing power back as he originally invested. In other words, if the inflationary period should recur some years hence at the time of the bond’s maturity, an automatic adjustment would be made and there would be repaid to the holder a value in money equivalent to the purchasing power he originally invested.

Certainly it is clear that any other suggested remedies will not reduce completely inflationary tendencies if personal savings are not greatly increased.

The issuance of such purchasing-power bonds would eliminate the inequities of the E type defense bonds, as seen in considerable loss of buying power suffered by those Americans who bought E bonds with recent maturing dates. For example, an $18.75 bond purchased in May 1941, if redeemed on May 15 of this year, would bring $25. That $25 however, in 1941 purchasing power would be worth only $14.67.  Thus the bond holder suffered a net loss in purchasing power of $4.08 on his original investment.

Our rearmament program has started the building of both our own military strength and that of our allies, but it has clearly had a decided impact upon the stability of our economy.

Some may argue that this impact was not caused directly by the defense effort but rather by scare buying, consumer and business anticipation of shortages and unnecessary nondefense expansion. And they may point to the fact that almost three fourths of the $40,000,000,000 increase in gross national product expenditures from the second quarter of 1950 till now has been spent for nondefense purposes.

To them I would say that whether the net result, an obviously already strained economy, is attributable directly, or indirectly to the rearmament program, the plain fact is that before further strain which, remember, Mr. Wilson has promised us for next year, is imposed, steps must be taken and taken fast to restore the American economy to a position of stability.

The inflationary forces that are now pushing the cost of living upward are far more severe than any in our history.

The job of controlling these forces has been complicated by the already inflated price levels that were in existence at the time of the commencement of the Korean struggle.

Faced with this most serious and complicated economic emergency, our action has been too little and too late until we find ourselves in our present precarious position.

Thus we are now paying and will continue to pay a heavy price for our failure a year ago to take the necessary actions to control the cost of living. It is, therefore, imperative that the Defense Production Act that will be in effect during the coming year when the impact of the defense program will be more heavily felt, should give the President the powers that he has asked for to control the economy and to provide for the common defense.