# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/united-states-senate-committee-on-foreign-relations-19510222

Gentlemen, my feelings on the matter of congressional responsibility in connection with sending troops to Europe are these:

Europe is important to us because of its resources, its manpower, and its strategic location. For these same reasons, it should be denied to the Russians.
I think it is fair to say that if American troops now there were withdrawn, or if the American troops now there were not increased in numbers, Europe's defense efforts would collapse, and it would be far easier for the communists to seize power in that area.
Therefore, it is important to place American troops in Europe.
That leads us to the question how many? Before we answer that, let us see what their role is to be.
I think it is obviously not the public policy of the United States to take on its shoulders complete responsibility for the land defense of Western Europe, even if we could do so.
It seems to me, therefore, that American troops are in Europe for three reasons:
           1) To participate in the actual defense of that area.
           2) To demonstrate to the Europeans that we are determined to hold the line: and
           3) And probably most important, to encourage the Europeans to develop their own forces.

How can these objectives be accomplished?

Before we decide this, it is well to summarize the rearmament program of the Europeans in order to determine the extent of their effort.

Extent of European Rearmament
I have just returned from a trip through Europe. I visited three of the chief countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Europe – England, France, and Italy, and three other countries, West Germany, Yugoslavia, and Spain, whose capacities and loyalties are obviously tied up in the question of the defense of the west.

Let us look briefly at the rearmament programs of several of these countries and the number of divisions they will produce for General Eisenhower's command.

Great Britain:
Great Britain should have under arms this year around 12 divisions, 2 of which are now in Western Germany and 2 more of which will be sent to Western Germany to be placed under the command of General Eisenhower. Because of the demands on Britain's manpower around the world, at present that is about as much as they plan to send to that area.

France:
France will have under arms this year 10 divisions, 5 of which should be in West Germany under the command of General Eisenhower and 5 more that could be moved forward very quickly; she will add 5 more in 1952 and 5 more in 1953, making a total of 20 divisions.

Italy:
Italy, because of the limitations of the peace treaty, is allowed only 175,000 men for her army. As yet Italy has not built up to this limit, and although her plans are substantial – she has just appropriated $400,000,000 for rearmament – it will be some time before the Italian forces are up to that level, and even when they reach that figure, it is not expected that they will serve in large numbers outside of Italy.

Belgium is expected to send about two divisions to western Germany, and perhaps two and one-half divisions will be placed on the border of Belgium.

The Dutch effort is limited. The Norwegian effort obviously will be taken up with defending their own country, and the Portuguese effort is naturally small and will be ineffective without the assistance of Spain.

Germany, the Crucial Factor
I think the key to this whole problem of the defense of Europe is Western Germany. As you know, under the Brussels agreement it was planned that the German contingent should serve in brigade groups in a Western European army, and that they should be limited to not more than 150,000, or about one-fifth of the total forces of the Western European army. I think that it is fair to say that our plans for western Germany have been received in a very brisk and cool fashion by the Germans.

Kurt Schumacher, leader of the Socialist Party and perhaps the most powerful figure in Western Germany, in a press conference in Bonn on August 23, 1950, expressed, I think, the prevailing German opinion. Here is what he said:

When anyone talks to the German people about a contribution to the forces of Europe, the talks must be of a contribution materially different from the contribution of any other people. Our nation has just suffered more than 3,000,000 deaths in men of arms-bearing ages and we have at least 3,000,000 badly crippled.
Elsewhere in his statement he makes it crystal clear that the brunt bearers in any clash with marching Russian divisions must be divisions from the United States.

I am not talking – he says – about increasing the American occupational force by a couple of divisions, but about a great concentration here of American power. If that is forthcoming, then we will say "Yes"; if not "No."

When I talked recently with Schumacher in Bonn, he set out the German conditions on rearming: First, complete political freedom; secondly, an Allied screen to protect their rearmament from Russian retaliation. Only then could German units take their place in the line. This will obviously be 18 months to 2 years off.

My conclusions are therefore these:

Troops Must Be Sent to Europe
It is obvious that there will not at the present rate be sufficient land forces in Europe to stop the Russians if they should attack, until the beginning of 1953 at the soonest.
There is always a possibility that the Russians will attack before that time, and, therefore, we should base part of our defense policy on the possible assumption that Europe may be lost.
What we are basically interested in, however, is in lowering the date, 1953, by which the land forces in Europe will be sufficient to deter an attack, or stop an attack if it should take place.
This can only be done by encouraging the Europeans to make greater sacrifices in order to increase their divisional strength.

United States Aid Should Be Proportionate to European Effort
In order to do that I do not think that there is any doubt that our aid must be proportionate to the effort of the Europeans. This ratio should be at least 6 to 1 in mobile forces, considering that we are only 1 of 12 countries in the Atlantic Pact; that we are supplying large naval and air elements: that we have heavy commitments elsewhere; and that a substantial part of the equipment of the European forces will be American.

If we want the job done, in my opinion, we should –

Send the proposed four divisions to Europe to supplement the two that are already there.
Insist that before any additional American troops over and above these 4 divisions are sent, the Western Europeans shall place under the command of General Eisenhower 36 divisions.
And that for each additional American division that is sent in the future, the European countries of the North Atlantic Pact will produce six.
This program to be under the supervision of the appropriate congressional committee who will report to the Congress.
At Present, Limitation on Troops Is Necessary
I have come reluctantly to the conclusion that there must be some type of limitation on our assistance, and with knowledge of its undesirable features. I believe that sometime in 1952, when we have a clearer conception of the extent of the European effort, the ratio system might be withdrawn and only a general supervision by the Congress over the program be maintained.

But for the present, if we want the job done, if we want to secure the maximum benefits from the American contribution, I see no other alternative to this proposal.

Ratio System
There are additional reasons why the ratio system should be adopted. The pressures to increase the size of the American land forces in Europe will be many and varied. There is the natural interest of the American military chiefs to secure better the protection of the forces already committed. We have seen that already. One of the arguments put forward for sending the additional four divisions was to protect the two already there. In addition, to a responsible commander the weakness of the North Atlantic forces in relation to the land armies of the enemy, and the natural concern that he must have regarding the caliber of some of his forces, will add to his desire to have further dependable American units under his control.

United States Commitments and Responsibilities Viewed as European Salvation
Joined with this will be the European efforts to have increased the American commitments to Europe. They see the power of the United States as their salvation, and they wish that power to defend them, not to liberate them.

It is no wonder that the Europeans supported an American, General Eisenhower, for commander of the North Atlantic forces; and that they supported Charles M. Spofford for Chairman of the Council of Deputies, North Atlantic Treaty Organization; and William Rogers Herod for Coordinator of Defense Production for the North Atlantic countries, all of which increased the degree of American responsibility.

All of this was expressed in direct and chilling words by Kurt Schumacher, when he said to a recent American visitor that he wanted to see American hostages in Germany.

The Europeans want American troops in Europe – troops that must be defended and supported by American power.

I do not object to this as long as we know what we are doing, but I do believe that if we are to be successful some system along the lines that I have suggested must be imposed.

Thank you.