# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/boston-ma-19520425

Abraham Lincoln has defined the role of government in a free economy as follows: "The function of government is to do for the people what they cannot do themselves, or cannot do so well, in their separate and individual capacities."

Under laissez-faire capitalism, it was assumed that the government had no interest except to keep hands off the private interests operating in the economy. In its origin business was personal, private, and exclusive. It was assumed that the public interest was thus automatically served through the totally unfettered competition of these private interests.  

We now realize that the general welfare is separate from and greater than the sum of private interests. This has not only been recognized, but has been written into the Statute Books by the Fair Employment Act of 1946.

"The Congress hereby declares that it is the continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal Government to use all practicable means consistent with its needs and obligations and other essential considerations of national policy, with the assistance and cooperation of industry, agriculture, labor, and state and local Governments to coordinate and utilize all its plans, functions, and resources for the purpose of creating and maintaining, in a manner calculated to foster and promote free competitive enterprise and the general welfare, conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment opportunities, including self-employment, for those able, willing, and seeking to work, and to promote maximum enjoyment, production, and purchasing power."

I want at this time to make clear my belief and my faith in a competitive economy in a democratic society wherein we seek to maximize the greatest good for the greatest number of people. This free competitive economy has given us the highest standard of living in human history. It has shouldered the burden for all free peoples in two great wars. It has brought America to the position of leadership in international affairs. Such a system should not be lightly cast aside for one which dances on the moonbeam of security for all, through the ownership of what Mr. Norman Thomas likes to call, "the commanding heights of our economic order."

But we recognize – it is impossible not to recognize that the public good cannot be best served by permitting the private economic order to function without the guiding hand of government intervention.

At the beginning, the basic intention of government in its relationship with our economy was to make sure that capitalism remained competitive. Competition was believed essential to the success of the capitalistic system, and the government by law and regulation has continued to maintain, at least in theory – "that bigness is a curse."

As our economy became more and more interdependent, as its great periods of exuberance and depression began to affect the lives and livelihood of our people – it became a matter of necessity for the government to intervene and set down in the words of the Brookings Institute's "Government and Economic Life" the operating rules of the private enterprise system. "They are made in the belief that private initiative is essentially selfish and that it is necessary to place restrictions upon actions which while desirable from the point of view of an individual or a group, are undesirable from the social or public point of view."

These "operating rules" have become more and more varied and differing techniques have been used to make them effective.  But it is important to stress that the "operating rules" are not made to hinder the growth of our free economy; they are not incompatible with the development of our free economy.

We have gone far from the days of the Sherman Act in our efforts to regulate the development of our economic jungle. Some controls are designed to regulate the atmosphere of our business activities by monetary controls. Regulation of our discount rates – open market operation – federal program of spending, lending, and taxation.

These powers are tremendous and their effect is far greater than we ever realized.

The application of our controls are not directed by doctrine. We are not by tradition doctrinaire. If we want to encourage farmers to plant – we give them subsidies, if we decide the rights of labor are not being recognized we give them protection by the Wagner Act. If it is felt that the strife between labor and management has become so great as to effect vitally the public good – we intervene wisely or not – with the National Labor Act of 1947. And again – if we discover this was a mistake we repeal it and write a new law. That is the American system of pragmatic action.  

Another objective of government intervention can be discernible in preserving the competitive position of particular industries and groups, by the protective tariff, by special aids to agriculture, the assistance to the transport industry, formerly the railroads and now the lavish protection given to the aviation industry. Along with this goes the actual rallying cry "Save Small Business" but little is ever accomplished.

The various powers and techniques that we have used to protect the public good are endless: The Securities and Exchange Act, The Utilities Act, Federal Management and supervision of railroads, highways, water transportation, and air transportation, the Reciprocal Trade Pact – the stockpiling of essential products, the F.C.C., the I.C.C., the C.A.A., and the C.A.B.  The list is many and varied. These controls and regulations and directives and pacts are enacted with the belief that government should regulate to the extent necessary to prevent private interest groups benefiting at the expense of the public. It should not interfere as the supreme planner of all economic activity, it should give encouragement where encouragement is needed, provide funds where funds are needed, and underwrite consumer spending when that is needed.

We can depend on our free competitive system to do the major work in serving the public – not government. We can depend on our free competitive system to develop advanced techniques and methods to produce the goods of highest quality at lowest cost which our people want as they exercise a free choice in a free market.  But we should not depend solely on a free competitive economy to curb its own abuses. This is a proper function of government – to do this adequately government must provide a climate where there is industrial peace, a climate favorable for research, development, and innovation, and the investment of risk capital, the maintenance of healthy free competition and an open door for both individual and group advancement.

But, there are areas where risk capital cannot be expected to do the job functions. "Where the people," in the words of Lincoln, "cannot do themselves or cannot do so well in their separate and individual capacity."  Public power is the clearest example of this. In undeveloped areas such as the Pacific Northwest, there are almost unlimited possibilities for hydro-electric power needed not only to develop industrially and to maintain our national security, but it represents the development of a new frontier of our dynamic economy. It is obvious that any economy which is progressive and dynamic must of necessity experience some fluctuations. Some of these fluctuations, essentially short run and mild, are caused by seasonal factors – technological improvements, shifts in demand, and shifts in the distribution of income.

Other fluctuations are long run and more violent – causes for which have been attributed by students of the cycle to such factors as wars, monetary irregularities, savings and investments maladjustments, lack of abundance of profit opportunities, sporadic introductions of inventions, violent mass psychological reactions – all of these complicated by related world wide repercussions. It is now a truism that business alone is not able to cope adequately with these major fluctuations But our experience in the middle and late thirties with governmental intervention gives us real hope that a cooperative effort by business and government together with labor and the farmer can smooth and dampen the effects of boom and bust on our people. It is obvious that the government will take more positive steps in future periods of unemployment than pump priming and unproductive work programs.

In order to lessen the effect of economic irregularities on the people we are building a solid platform of security for them.  Extended social security, unemployment compensation, old-age pension, the extension of health services, public housing and slum clearance of the low income group, the raising of the minimum wage to 75¢, to build consumer purchasing power, rent control, federal aid for education to enable our youth to be better able to maintain themselves, are all designed to free the people from the rigors of a fluctuating economy.

The powers of the government are great. We know that they will continually strive to make our forward march easier.  But the future of a free competitive economy that provides security for all within the essential freedom for individuals and groups is bright and full of promise. Upon it rests our hopes. We must stand firm against those well meaning men who point to our failures, which are many, and ignore our successes, which are even more numerous, and who ask us to enter willingly into the bondage of government paternalism.

Justice Brandeis perhaps expressed it best when he said, "Experience should teach us to be on our guard to protect liberty when the government's purposes are beneficent. The greatest dangerous to liberty lurk in insidious encroachment by men of zeal, well-meaning but without understanding."