# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/lenox-ma-19520906

When we talk about economy in the Federal Government, we must divide our subject. As you know, today about 75 cents out of every dollar the Government spends, goes into our defense program. Now there is, of course, room for economy in defense spending. But the problems in this direction are different from those presented by the civilian departments of the Government, and the approach must be different. You just can’t use the word "economy," and expect it to cover all of our spending sins.

Let’s take the civilian branches first.

We hear sometimes some quite wild statements about how much fat can be cut off our non-defense appropriations. But if we are realistic, and specific, we find that all we can expect to cut, even under the most favorable circumstances, is about $1,200,000,000 – at least at present. But that is quite a sizable sum. It represents, for instance, about $32 for the average family of four. And that is worthwhile.

Overstaffing is probably the first and most likely subject for our economy, fat-cutting knife. It is remarkable how the various bureaus in official Washington have grown, and grown, and grown. 

In 1941, for instance, the State Department had 4,000 employees. In 1951 it had 28,000 – just seven times as many.

To be sure, 13,000 of these employees are engaged in the recently created information and education service, which carries on our Voice of America program and other propaganda services abroad. But even without this addition, the number of employees in the Department had been multiplied by 4.

The Department of Agriculture is another offender. The Hoover Report, you may remember, recommended that a score of bureaus be consolidated into eight divisions. But the Senate Committee replied with a vehement no.

At present the Department is a huge federation of loosely knit bureaus which in large part are almost self-directing. These bureaus are in most cases based on the counties, and they spread throughout the land.

There are, for instance, the County Agents, whose job is to assist farmers to follow the most up-to-date farming practice. Their salaries are paid jointly by the Federal Government and the localities in which they serve.

Then there is in most counties a representative of the Production and Marketing Association . . . whose duty it is, actually, to hold up the price of farm products by making loans on stored commodities and, in some cases, by putting acreage limitations into effect.

Then there is the Soil Conservation Service . . . and the Farm Home Administration (which aids poorer farmers) . . . and the Rural Electrification Administration . . . the Crop Insurance Corporation . . . the Reclamation Service . . . the Forest Service . . . the teachers of vocational agriculture and home economics in high schools . . . the various farm credit agencies . . . and so forth.

Now many, indeed, all of these bureaus provide important services for American agriculture. No general criticism of the function of these various bureaus is implied. But the point is that we have here a great conglomeration of bureaus which geographically overlap . . . a vast maze of function much of which is performed in duplicate . . . and, in any event, a far reaching system of job tenure . . . which cries out for consolidation . . . organization . . . streamlining.

In 1950, a magazine article revealed this situation in a startling manner. In one single county in the mid-west, it was discovered, there were a total of 178 employees of the Department, both full and part time. This added up to a payroll of $86,000 annually.

In this same county there were 2,500 farms. In other words the local, county activities of the Department of Agriculture were at the rate of $35 per farm per year.

It has been estimated that if we could but attack and solve this problem of over-staffing in these and other departments of the Federal Government, the American taxpayer could be saved somewhere around $209,000,000 annually.

The next area for potential economy in the civilian branches of the Federal Government is public works.

Here we have three main categories:

Flood control and river and harbor development.
Irrigation projects.
Public Roads.
This year we shall spend about $584,000,000 on our rivers and harbors. On the East Coast and the Great Lakes, harbors will be deepened and widened, river channels will be dredged and opened, and the levies which line the lower reaches of our great rivers like the Mississippi and Ohio will be built up and maintained against the rampage of flood. This work is done by the United States Army . . . by its so-called "civil" department, the Corps of Engineers.

No work is more important than flood prevention. Yet much of the other appropriations for our so-called rivers and harbors projects should be carefully scrutinized.

For instance, $116,000,000 has been spent on maintaining a nine-foot channel in the Missouri from St. Louis to Kansas City, and it is now proposed that we spend another $179,000,000 to extend the channel north of Sioux City, Iowa . . . and still other proposals to go still further north into South Dakota. None of this past, or proposed expenditure, please note, has anything to do with flood control.

Yet now let us see what we have gotten for the $116,000,000 we have already spent on the channel just up to Kansas City. Traffic on this stretch has fallen far short of expectations. In 1949, for instance, it amounted in all to only 917,000 tons, of which one-quarter was sand and gravel, and three-quarters was in material used by the Government itself in Government work.

The cost per mile of the St. Louis-Kansas City channel was $386,900. This sum, according to statements made by the admittedly prejudiced railroads, is equal to the total mileage construction costs of all four railroads which run between these two cities.

This is but one of the larger and more prominent non-flood control projects undertaken by the Corps of Engineers. But it illustrates the essential problem, which is to bring to bear on all such proposals the most careful and appraising judgment.

What we should ask ourselves is not just: is this project "good?" We should ask: Is it really needed? Is it essential? Is it economic? Will it be worth what it will cost us? And, finally, if the answers to the above are in the affirmative and we do decide to go ahead: will we get a dollar value for every dollar we spend?

When we come to irrigation projects, which are handled by the Bureau of Reclamation of the Department of Commerce, we are faced with a somewhat similar problem.

No one will deny that it is highly desirable to bring useless land into production of food crops. But again we should weigh the pros and cons of these projects carefully and ask ourselves if our money will be well spent.

As a very rough, horse-back figure, we might set the cost of bringing land under cultivation today at around $700 an acre. On the average, that is; for some projects, of course, it will be cheaper. Now against this figure, we must place the price of good farm land – somewhere between $500 and $550 per acre.

Obviously irrigation projects should be placed under a fiscal microscope before we rush in with appropriations of our tax payers’ money.

To irrigate land at the cost of $700 an acre, when land is worth only $500, is the sort of fiscal shenanigans which will head us towards the bankruptcy courts, if we persist in such practices. And it will be of small comfort in such an eventuality to be able to tell ourselves that we at least went broke in a good cause – reclaiming agricultural land.

Probably the best way to assure ourselves of this scrutiny of proposed irrigation projects, would be to make those who benefit directly pay part of the cost. That would immediately take some of the pressure for new projects off Congress.

Is there any reason why the owners of land whose value will be greatly enhanced by irrigation, should not pay at least part of the cost?

Why should privately owned acres be enriched entirely from the public purse?

In road building our problem is somewhat different. A broad system of good highways is absolutely essential to the national welfare. And the system in which the Federal Government shares the cost of these highways with the states, has worked well. It has in fact dug this country out of the mud in the past 30 years.

Recently a new trend can be seen developing, largely to date in the South and Southwest. And this trend would extend the aid now given by the Federal Government to the so-called "secondary roads," or feeder roads. These secondary roads have hitherto, of course, been the responsibility of local government.

It would seem that this trend should be halted. If it is not, an entirely new spending outlet will be opened up to the Federal Treasury to which we can see no end.

We have touched here on only a few areas where we can achieve economy in the Federal Government, and not at all on the military activities. Nor have we spoken of various means by which revenue could be increased by plugging the so-called tax loopholes.

Nor have we looked into the matter of the subsidies which the Federal Government provides for many industries like shipping, sugar, silver, and the mail.

But limited as is the area we have touched on, the savings which could be effected are indeed impressive – say $200,000,000 by cutting personnel – $400,000,000 in public works.

Other savings in the civilian budget could be made in the Post Office, say $350,000,000, and in reducing subsidies, say by another $180,000,000.

All in all, it seems entirely possible to cut in all the $1,200,000,000 from the civilian government.

Congress has made some progress in this direction.

Last spring and early summer, for instance, we cut the proposed budget by 9 per cent for the military, 10 per cent in the independent offices, 18 per cent in the State, Justice, and Commerce departments.

But the trouble with such percentage cuts is that they all too often simply don’t stick. The money is spent anyway, and then the request comes through again to Congress in the form of demands for supplementary appropriations.

What we need is a fine tooth comb and a microscope with which to approach spending proposals, item by item.

Congress must keep a firm, and informed, hand on the purse strings by evaluating each proposal, each project with the utmost care.

Government economy is not bought easily. It is come by only as the result of intensive application, well-informed judgement, and, often, considerable political courage.

But it is a crying necessity.

Prudence and fiscal responsibility loom as a crying need today.