# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/united-states-house-of-representatives-19520625

Mr. Speaker, I want to express my alarm over the strangulation of the fishing industry of Massachusetts by vastly increased imports of ground fish fillets from other nations. If the trend continues, as it shows every sign of doing, the investment of many millions of American capital will be wiped out and thousands of men who have made fishing a lifelong career will be out of work. The ports of Boston, New Bedford, and Gloucester are particularly affected.

In the case of Gloucester, a community of some 25,000 people, the fishing industry gives employment, directly or indirectly, to more than two-thirds of the entire working population. Consequently, the banking, mercantile, in fact the entire business structure of the city depends for survival on the local fisheries. If they are destroyed, Gloucester will become a dead city, since it can turn to no other industry.

In 1940, less than 10,000,000 pounds of fillets entered this country from foreign sources, principally Canada and Newfoundland. Five years later, this figure had risen to more than 43,000,000 pounds. In 1950, imports mounted to nearly 67,000,000 pounds, and, in 1951, soared to more than 87,000,000 pounds.

For the first 4 months of 1952 imports had reached 42,734,478 pounds compared with 31,662,446 pounds in the same period of 1951. If imports continue at the same rate throughout the current year, total imports will rise to the fantastic total of more than 110,000,000 pounds. In other words, imports would reach something like 75 percent of total New England production. I think it is fair to say that, unless emergency measures are taken to correct the situation, the crack of doom is sounding for an industry which has flourished in New England for many generations.

The increased imports are coming from Iceland, Norway, Denmark, Greenland, particularly Iceland, whose production of groundfish fillets mushroomed during World War II. Before 1940 annual Iceland production was around 1,000,000 pounds. By 1945 it had grown to 53,000,000 and in 1949 to 80,000,000 pounds. Because of the loss of European markets, Iceland exports dropped thereafter, but the United States has taken more than 15,000,000 pounds in the first 4 months of this year.

I am a firm believer in the philosophy of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act, for which Cordell Hull labored so long and ably; and I am a firm believer in subsequent international agreements by which other nations have been enabled to sell their products in the United States, as we sell their products to them. World trade can never be a one-way street. But neither the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act nor any international agreement has ever contemplated the assassination of an industry, such as is now happening in Massachusetts.

To make that perfectly clear, Congress last year passed H.R. 1612, now Public Law No. 50 of the Eighty-second Congress, otherwise known as the Bailey amendment to the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act. This resolution provides that if a product on which a concession has been granted is being imported into this country in such amounts that the domestic industry is being seriously injured, or is threatened with serious injury, then the concession may be withdrawn, modified, or an import quota established to afford proper and an adequate protection to that industry. The fishing industry of Massachusetts is asking for such relief through the United States Tariff Commission.

It is rather ironic that the filleting of fish, an American idea for which a huge market has developed, has backfired against its originators. Formerly, whole fish, bones and all, were sold to the retail markets. Fillets consist of boneless slabs of flesh cut from the sides of fish. These slabs are wrapped in cellophane and packed in 5- or 10-pound laminated cardboard boxes. Foreign nations have seized this popular idea and, because of lower labor and other costs and because of governmental subsidies of various kinds, have been able to take over a large part of the American market.

Under prevailing tariff formulas, it has been determined that in the current year, more than 31,000,000 pounds of ground fish of fillets can be imported at the very low rate of 1⅞ cents per pound, and an unlimited amount at the rate of 2½ cents. These rates offer small obstacles to foreign producers, whose costs of processing, packing, and freezing fillets give them an advantage of from 11 to 15 cents a pound in shipping fillets to this country. When a duty of 1⅞ or 2½ cents is deducted, foreign operators still have a wide margin of operation.

These other countries pay considerably lower sums to their fisherman than we do. The same is true of workers who process the fish. In addition, the governments of these competing countries have subsidized the building of vessels, processing plants, and freezers and even have subsidized transportation. In some cases, American money has financed these subsidies schemes, so that American taxpayers have helped foreign governments to compete unfairly with our own countrymen.

Two years ago, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, with industry's co-operation, asked Congress to supply funds for study of the possibility of freezing fish at sea. Such a development would be revolutionary in its implications for our Massachusetts fishing industry because of cost reductions. The appropriation requested was small, just enough to cover bare necessities, such as transfer of a trawler to the Fish and Wildlife Service. Yet Congress cut the amount so drastically that it has become impossible to operate the trawler for more than 6 months at a time, seriously hampering the progress of the study.

At the same time, ECA was able to find $750,000 to give to Portugal to build and maintain a hospital ship for its countrymen who were fishing the Grand Banks. ECA was able to give Indonesia $1,200,000 to develop its commercial fishery potentials. Iceland got $315,000 to buy industrial supplies and commodities, including cardboard boxes used in packing fillets. I make no criticism of ECA's remarkable efforts to strengthen the war-torn economies of other countries, but I do insist that when its efforts tend to wreck American industry, action should be taken to redress the balance.

As I have said, the present tariff duties represent no obstacle to the foreign producer. His heavy original advantage of low cost allows him a very high markup at the selling point. Our own domestic fillet is based upon actual cost of manufacturing plus a normal mark-up. The foreign producer, having a greater gross profit at the outset, assures himself of a substantial net profit by offering his fillets at prices slightly below those listed for American-produced fillets.

It is freely admitted by the Massachusetts fishing industry that if the American housewife were able to buy foreign fillets for much less than domestic fillets would cost her, then it could not logically sustain a case against importers. But that is not true.

There is very little difference, if any, between the retail prices of the domestic fillet and the retail price of the imported fillet. So, actually, the domestic producer finds himself in the unhappy predicament of providing an umbrella for the foreign producer. Surely such a situation cannot have been contemplated by the philosophy of the reciprocal-trade pacts.

I have spoken of the need for emergency relief, and I now cite to you some very significant evidence, namely, the telltale one of rising inventories. On January 1, 1952, there were nearly 21,000,000 pounds of ocean perch in cold storage, compared with less than 10,000,000 pounds in 1951. In other words, there was an increase of 11,000,000 pounds – an amount impossible to move on any regular-price schedule. The result is to throw fish on the market at sacrifice prices – real losses

These are the portents of disaster.

I am obviously not arguing for exclusion of all foreign ground fish fillets from the American market, but only for a realistic approach of live and let live. I believe a fair and equitable quota limitation should be established. I believe that the rate of duty on all fillets should be adjusted so as to provide a greater degree of protection for the domestic industry.

Recognition of the problem was given by the Committee on the New England Economy in its July 1951 report to the President of the United States, when it said that one of the major problems "facing the New England fishing industry is the increasing competition from foreign sources. Imports provided only 4 percent of United States consumption of fresh and frozen fish in 1931; they accounted for 23 percent in 1948."

As a Member of Congress from Massachusetts, I believe it is my grave duty to call attention to what seems a classic case of inequity and injustice to an industry which for many generations has been interwoven with the honorable and gallant traditions of my State.