# https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/massachusetts-democratic-party-19540123

It is a great privilege to welcome to Massachusetts as speaker for the evening, Governor G. Mennen Williams of Michigan. It is my pleasant task to serve in a dual capacity, and not only introduce Governor Williams to the Democratic Party of our state, but also to introduce the Massachusetts Democratic Party to Governor Williams.

Governor, I want you to meet the Democrats of The Bay State. Perhaps you have heard from the Democratic National Committee, as was reported in the January issue of Fortune magazine, that this is the "worst state in the Union to deal with because there is no one to deal with." In short, the Democratic Party here, its leaders and its members, wear the brand of no man, no boss and no machine. Such courageous and fighting leaders as Ex-Governor Dever, Congressman McCormack, Ex-Mayor Curley, and the late Maurice Tobin have all maintained their individual independence regardless of any attempts to control their votes, their actions, and their minds. Such a diversity may be a cause for despair to the Democratic National Committee and those interested in the smooth dispensation of patronage – that is, back in the days when patronage was a subject of interest to the Democrats. But it is not a source of despair or shame to the Massachusetts Democrats; on the contrary, we are proud of our independence and we intend to maintain it regardless of what others may say or write about us. Such a course is not always easy; for, as pointed out by Edmund Burke many years ago: "Those who would carry on the work of the public must be hardened to expect the most grievous disappointments, the most shocking insults, and what is worst of all, the presumptuous judgment of the ignorant upon their actions."

I have no doubt, Governor Williams, that you too have been subjected to attacks by those seeking to control your office or your party. But I know from your record that you have always maintained the principles of political freedom and integrity which are fundamental to the vigor and progress of the Democratic Party. I know of your courage, and your service overseas as a Lieut. Comdr. in the Navy, and of your decoration of the Legion of Merit and the Presidential Citation. I know of your experience in Washington, as a Government lawyer for the Social Security Board and the Department of Justice before the war and Deputy Director of OPA shortly after the war. We all know that as Governor of Michigan since your election in 1948, you have given inspired leadership to the problems of unemployment which have, from time to time, affected areas within your state. It is therefore with great pleasure that I welcome you here tonight on behalf of all of the citizens of Massachusetts; that I have introduced to you, Governor, our fighting, independent and progressive Democratic Party; and it is with great pleasure that I introduce to the Democratic Party, the fighting, independent and progressive Governor of Michigan, Governor G. Mennen Williams.