# https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/Ms_Brianna_Fruean_Ms_Txai_Suru%C3%AD_Ms_Elizabeth_Wathuti.pdf

Brianna – FINAL
When I was a little girl I was taught the importance and impact of words. In my 
culture there is a proverb that goes, “e pala ma’a ae lē pala upu”. It means that even 
stones decay, but words remain.
A lesson in knowing how words can be wielded.
How text can change everything. How each word you use is weighted. How 
switching 1 word or number can reframe worlds. How “climate action” can be vastly 
different from “climate justice”. How 2 degrees could mean “the end” and 1.5 could 
mean “a fighting chance”.
You all have the power here today to be better. To remember that your meeting 
rooms and drafting documents are not just black and white objects. To remember 
that in your words, you wield the weapons that can save us or sell us out.
I don’t need to remind you of the reality of our vulnerable communities. If you’re in 
this room you know what climate change is doing to us. You don’t need my pain or 
tears to know that we’re in a crisis.
The real question is whether you have the political will to do the right thing, to wield 
the right words and follow it up with long overdue action.
If you’re looking for inspiration on climate leadership, take a look at young Pacific 
people. We are not just victims to this crisis, we have been resilient beacons of 
hope.
As Pacific youth we have always rallied behind the warrior cry “we are not drowning, 
we are fighting”.
This is my message from Earth to COP.
I hope you remember my words, because
“e pala ma’a ae le pala upu”.
Thank you.
———
Now please welcome to the stage - Chai sudo-e
Txai – FINAL 
My name is Txai Suruí. I am only 24, but my people have been living in the Amazon 
rainforest for at least six thousand years. My father, the great chief Almir Suruí taught me 
that we must listen to the stars, the moon, the wind, the animals, and the trees.
Today the climate is warming, the animals are disappearing, the rivers are dying, and our 
plants don't flower like they did before. The earth is speaking. She tells us that we have no 
more time.
A friend asked me: will we continue thinking that today's injuries can be resolved with 
ointments and painkillers, even though we know that tomorrow our wounds will only run 
deeper?
We need a different path with bold and global changes.
It's not 2030 or 2050, it is now!
While you're closing your eyes to reality, the land defender Ari Uru-eu-wau-wau, my friend 
since I was a kid, was murdered for protecting the forest.
Indigenous peoples are in the front line of the climate emergency, and we must be at the 
center of the decisions happening here. We have ideas to postpone the end of the world.
Let us stop emitting lies and fake promises; let us end the pollution of hollow words, and let 
us fight for a liveable future and present.
It is always necessary to believe that the dream is possible.
May our utopia be a future on earth.
Thank you.
Elizabeth – FINAL 
My name is Elizabeth Wathuti. 
I am a youth climate activist from Kenya. 
I have done a lot of soul-searching about what to say here today. 
I have asked myself, over and over, what words might move you. 
And then I realised that making my four minutes count does not rest solely on me. 
My truth will only land if you have the grace to fully listen. 
My story will only move you if you can open up your heart. 
I can urge you to act at the pace and scale necessary - but, in the end, your will to act 
must come from deep within. 
-------
I need to tell you what is happening in my home country. 
Right now, as we sit comfortably here in this conference center in Glasgow, over 2 
million of my fellow Kenyans are facing climate-related starvation. 
In this past year, both of our rainy seasons have failed - and scientists say that it may be 
another 12 months before the waters return again. 
Meanwhile, our rivers are running dry, our harvests are failing, our storehouses stand 
empty, our animals and people are dying. 
I have seen, with my own eyes, three young children crying at the side of a dried up 
river, after walking 12 miles with their mother to find water. 
Please open your hearts. 
This is not only happening in Kenya. 
Over the past few months, there have been deadly heat-waves and wildfires in Algeria 
and devastating floods in Uganda and Nigeria. 
And there is more still to come. 
By 2025 - in just 4 years’ time - half of the world’s population will be facing water 
scarcity. 
By the time I’m 50, the climate crisis will have displaced 86 million people in SubSaharan Africa alone. 
I would like us to hold a moment of compassionate silence for the billions of people who 
are not here with us today - whose stories are not being heard, whose suffering is not 
being felt. 
Please open your hearts. 
[15 seconds of silence] 
If you allow yourself to feel it, the heartbreak - and the injustice - is hard to bear. 
Sub-Saharan Africans are responsible for just half a percent of historical emissions. The 
children are responsible for none. But they are bearing the brunt. 
-------
We are the adults on this earth right now - and it is our responsibility to ensure that the 
children have food and water. 
I have been doing what I can. Inspired by the great Professor Wangari Maathai, I 
founded the Green Generation Initiative - a tree growing initiative that enhances food 
security for young Kenyans. 
So far we have grown 30,000 fruit trees to maturity, providing desperately needed 
nutrition to thousands of children. 
Every day we see that when we look after the trees, they look after us. 
But these trees - and the life-saving fruit they bear - will not survive on a 3oC warmer 
planet. 
The decisions you make here will help determine whether the rains will return to our 
land. 
The decisions you make here will help determine whether the fruit trees we plant will 
live or perish. 
The decisions you make here will help determine whether children will have food and 
water. 
-------
I believe in our human capacity to care deeply and to act collectively.
I believe in our ability to do what is right if we let ourselves feel it in our hearts. So for 
these next two weeks let us feel it in our hearts.
Please open your hearts.
And then act.