# https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/JORDAN_cop26cmp16cma3_HLS_EN.pdf

Prime Minister
Mr President,
Your Excellencies:
Let me begin by thanking the government and the people of the United Kingdom, 
for welcoming this historic Conference.
And let me thank the dedicated people from across the world who have steadily 
focused on means to counter the climate threat.
But our gathering here is evidence that the larger international effort has not been 
enough.
We see this, not only in extreme events—firestorms, flooding, deadly landslides. 
But we also see it in the inch-by-inch loss of healthy, essential environment, lands and 
waters that are the lifeblood of billions of people.
The Middle East has been among the hardest-hit regions. In Jordan, reduced 
rainfalls and high evaporation have combined to a deadly effect. The Jordan River is a 
shadow of what the Bible and our forefathers depicted. The Dead Sea is dropping by 
more than half a metre a year. Freshwater aquifers are dwindling, and their salinity 
rising. All this compounds our extreme water scarcity, already under pressure because 
of massive refugee flows.
This is why Jordan is committed to the climate change fight.
When Jordan joined the Paris Agreement in 2015, we set a target of a 14-percent 
carbon reduction by 2030. And now, we aim to double it over the next nine years, with 
your help.
To achieve this, we have identified 32 emission-reduction projects, with a total 
cost of $7.6 billion dollars.
The work has begun. Jordan has been a regional pioneer in renewable energy, 
clean mobility, and other green technologies. We have worked closely with the greentech industry, and we welcome continued partnership.
Numerous solar and wind projects are up and running. And this sector will 
continue to grow, as we plan to export electricity to neighbouring countries.
We are closing the water loop, through the optimal use of highly treated water and 
advanced farming methods.
Other initiatives will enhance our resiliency in key areas such as disaster 
mitigation, carbon recapture, food security, and waste management. We are embarking 
on an ambitious forestation effort to plant 10 million trees over the next 10 years within 
our protected areas.
And we are taking steps to care for a unique marine resource, our resilient coral 
reefs in the Gulf of Aqaba. We have designated a protected nature reserve, and with 
your support, will be able to leverage learnings about effective climate change 
mitigation and adaptation, by establishing a marine science and research park in Aqaba 
to help marine areas at risk across the globe, and increase knowledge sharing on water, 
energy, and environmental research.
In all our efforts, international partners have been and will be essential. A key part 
of this is COP-26 support for developing countries, both to mitigate the destruction 
caused by global climate change, and to sustain work for a greener, safer future.
My friends,
It will do little good to address the climate threat in one place and ignore it 
elsewhere. Human impact, on a global level, has created the climate crisis, and human 
action, on a global level, is required to end it.
Truly, this is the fight of our lives. And Jordan will continue to play its full part.
Thank you.