It is a great honor for me to be invited to speak here tonight before the officers of the National Guard of Massachusetts.
From the birth of this nation to the present day the defense of our nation has in good part lain with the National Guard and their predecessors – the American militia. The militia fought with distinction in the American Revolution, members of it stormed the hills of Chapultepec in 1847, were with Meade at Gettysburg, and with Sheridan at Winchester.
We of Massachusetts know well the record of the National Guard in the First World War – there are men of the immortal 26th with us tonight. In this last war, divisions like the hard-bitten Americal; the 37th of Minnesota and Wisconsin; the 36th of Texas, who immortalized in blood the Rapido River, brought distinction to the Army of the United States and victory to our country.
Tonight I thought I would discuss with you some of the major problems that we are facing today. I do this because I believe it is essential that we comprehend the truth of what Clausewitz said: "War is but an extension of politics."
Today in a time of total war, the strength of our country can be measure as much by the vigor of our economic and political system as by the size of our armies.
Certainly, for example, the success or failure of the Marshall Plan will affect strongly the strategic position that we occupy at the outbreak of another war.
Certainly, a national health plan will be of utmost importance to us in determining the number of men available for our armies. Certainly federal aid to education will do much toward wiping out the illiteracy which hampered the services in the late war.
The plain fact is that you who are concerned with the defense of America must recognize that our defense depends as much on our economic and political strength as on the number of soldiers and sailors in our armed forces.
I think that domestically the two most important problems are the grievous shortage of housing and the ever swelling inflation of prices.
In their conception the problems differ: inflation is a by-product of total war, the result of the impact of war-time spending on a peace-time economy. Housing, on the other hand, is a problem that has been with us since the end of the First World War. It has merely been highlighted by the plight of the returning veteran.
Most people find it hard to understand why they must be obliged to face these spiraling prices. The answer lies in the fact that the total income coming in to the people of America in wages, salaries, profits, and interest, has nearly tripled since 1939. While we have had this tremendous increase in our purchasing power, there has been as insufficient supply of goods on the market to absorb this increased purchasing power. This deficiency has been caused by the fact that for four years the energies of American industry were devoted to war rather than peacetime production.
The more income that we earn in this country without a relative increase in production results in higher prices.
We cannot, for example, greatly increase our production in food, to meet the large foreign and domestic demands, without a radical change in our economy. We are now producing at 95% capacity in our steel industry. Therefore, unfortunately, increased purchasing power whether achieved thorough tax reductions or through increases in wages means merely more money to buy the same quantity of goods. This may give us temporary relief, but will inevitably result in pushing prices up higher, and further increase the possibility of a disastrous slump later on.
It is this serious problem the congress now faces. Perhaps if the OPA had been strongly administered and had received total public support and the black market had been vigorously stamped out, we could have surmounted this post-war problem. But that is now academic, and inflation will inevitably affect our foreign commitments and our capacity to protect ourselves militarily and strategically.
The situation in housing – the other great domestic problem – is equally serious. Necessary to solve this shortage will be speedy enactment of the Taft-Ellender-Wagner housing bill, which has for three years languished in the committees of the House and Senate. It is now too obvious to need mention that the building and real estate industries simply cannot supply homes for which the low income group, which includes 85% of veterans, can afford to pay. It is not completely the fault of the builders. Inflation of prices has affected them, but their protests of helplessness would be more sympathetically received if they discontinued their support of the most active lobby in Washington, which has successfully blocked the enactment of the Taft-Ellender-Wagner housing bill, sole hope for the homeless veteran.
There are other equally important domestic problems: the enactment of further social legislation combined with the enactment of legislation to strengthen our free enterprise system, both of which will contribute to building a strong national economy to support the great drain caused by the essential military expenditures. These expenditures may get larger. Certainly further developments must be made in the field of aviation, and all of us recognize that the National Guard is not receiving the acknowledgment in Washington that its importance warrants.
I cannot stop without mentioning something of the necessity for the passage of the Marshall Plan, expensive though it may be for the United States. It is an essential step in maintaining our national security.
Long a cornerstone of our foreign policy has been the belief that American security would be dangerously threatened if the continent of Europe or that of Asia were dominated by any one power. We fought in 1917 when it appeared that Germany would break through the thinning lines of the French and British and win through to domination of the European continent.
We fought again in 1941 to oppose the domination of Asia by the empire of Japan. We fought in Europe to prevent the fall of Britain and of Russia, and the consequent subjugation of Europe and Asia and the Middle East.
The atomic bomb and the guided missile have not yet weakened that cornerstone. We would still fight, I believe, to prevent Europe and Asia from becoming dominated by one great military power, and we will oppose bitterly, I believe, the subjugation of the suffering people of Europe and Asia by Red totalitarianism.
I think it is safe to say that the pledges that the leaders of both parties here have made in support of the Marshall Plan, and the speedy enactment of the Interim Aid Bill, have already resulted in an important victory for the United States. These actions gave strong support to the French and Italian governments in their recent successful clash with the storm-troopers of the new totalitarianism.
The communists are now on the defensive in Europe. It is our job to keep them that way. If the Marshall Plan succeeds, they will be defeated.
I have touched briefly this evening on some of the national problems we face today. To solve them will necessitate the untiring efforts of all Americans. What the future holds for Russia and ourselves, no one can say. Certainly for the immediate present we would seem to be secure. The existence of the United Nations and the repeated demonstrations of the appalling risks of war, nor least of the risks to the individuals in power when war begins, will be sufficient to prevent the purely accidental war.
War will only break out because some great power wants it, and a great power can want war for one of two reasons: either because like Hitler in 1939 it believes not only that it can get its way by war, but that also it can do so easily and quickly; or because it is so badly frightened by the war-like preparations of others that it desires to strike while there is time.
The reason why there is no risk of war now is because no great power is either confident enough of the results of war, or frightened enough of the consequences of peace. There is yet no evidence that the rulers of Soviet Russia intend to back their stake with war. They are neither sufficiently scornful nor sufficiently frightened of American military strength to run the risk. They know that if they started a war now win or lose – it would certainly be a long, hard war – and that they dare not face.
There is, then, no immediate risk of war. But what of the longer run? It would be foolish to be very optimistic about the long term prospects of peace. Mankind has never succeeded in keeping the peace for very long, and the available evidence does not suggest that the present generation is so much more intelligent or fortunate in its circumstances that it will be able to succeed where all its forefathers failed. But, as we have said, armed war will not break out unless the rulers of Russia – for the contingency of American aggression can really be ruled out – want it to break out; and that means until they either think they can win quickly or they really become as badly frightened as their propagandists try to make them out to be. It follows that the right long term policy for us is to aim to produce a psychology in Moscow that is neither over-confident nor over-fearful. To do this we must stand firm against the encroachments of the communists, while seizing every opportunity to maintain and win the peace.
This will be a difficult policy. Where it will end no one can tell. All we can do is use the time we have to prepare ourselves for the worst, in the hope that in so doing the worst may not happen.
You, as Guardsmen, by your sacrifice, have earned the good will and affection of all in America. But your services cannot and must not be confined to purely military matters.
Our national security is not divisible. Its strength lies not in our guns alone, but in the economic and political strength that we can develop, and in the hearts and minds of the American people.
We, as veterans, must have a special interest in maintaining our freedom. Every soldier of every army since war began has asked himself "Why am I here?" And this question must, of necessity, cause him to analyze the country for which he fights and the things in that country which symbolize its greatness to him. This country may mean different things to all of us – but most veterans, I think, have come to feel an attachment for it that perhaps had they lived their days in peace, they never would have known.
