I feel privileged to be in Newburyport, one of the strongest ramparts of the Jimmy Fund, because good friends of mine in all walks of life have told me that there is no greater champion of children’s causes in general and the Jimmy Fund in particular than that outstanding citizen of your city, Sammy Howard.
Probably no greater tribute has been paid to the Jimmy Fund than the one paid by Archbishop Cushing, who said:
"The Jimmy Fund Drive is one of the greatest of all charity appeals. As one interested in underprivileged children of all types, I am particularly concerned about the little tots who suffer from bodily diseases. The Jimmy Fund helps the most pitiable of these holy innocents, children who are victims of the dread disease of cancer. I pray that everyone will contribute to it and that the Divine Friend of little children will bless all of you."
In addition to the great humanitarian work the Jimmy Fund has made possible, it has also been one of the best examples of democracy at work creating as it does a wonderful and warm relationship among children, people of the sports and entertainment world, the Chiefs of police who strive so hard for its success, and all the other groups of men and women who have banded together to make this one of the greatest of all charities.
If you would bear with me for a while, I would like to relate to you some of the interesting highlights of the Jimmy Fund, how it started and progressed to the unique place it now occupies among the great charitable efforts of all time.
One Saturday night in Boston, four years ago, a 12-year old boy, whose real name was not Jimmy, talked with a few baseball players on a coast-to-coast radio broadcast. The boy was a patient himself, but that night he was an actor – representing all children afflicted with cancer.
That radio show marked the beginning of the Jimmy Fund, one of this country’s most unusual charitable enterprises. Without a single paid professional fund-raising expert, it has become established as a permanent Foundation within a few short years.
The Jimmy Fund has enabled Doctor Sidney Farber, Chief of the Research Division of Boston’s famed Children’s Hospital, one of the most widely-known authorities in the field of cancer research, to recruit and assemble in one place a "team" of 64 scientists dedicated to routing this scourge.
It has made possible the construction of the $1,500,000 Jimmy Building of the Children’s Cancer Research Foundation, now caring for hundreds of young patients, the first structure in the world devoted entirely to the battle against cancer in children.
Next to accidents, cancer is the nation’s number two killer of children between one and 14 years of age, and number one in children five to nine years of age. From 1927 to last year, Doctor Farber and a few associates have been working on a cure for it in cramped quarters at the Hospital.
Four years ago, they established a cancer chemotherapy clinic which is now the largest in the world. Three months later they made the first observation that a new type of chemical compound, synthesized by the crack chemists of the Lederle Laboratories, could affect acute leukemia. This opened a new era in the field of cancer research. But, to wage chemical warfare against the killer on a scale the Boston doctors considered necessary would take considerably more money than was then available for such work.
Word began to get around about what was happening at the Children’s Hospital. The Variety Club of New England, an organization of theatrical people devoted to worthwhile activities for youngsters, heard about it and decided to adopt this research program as a permanent Club charity. Thus the Children’s Cancer Research Foundation, with Doctor Farber as Scientific Director, was organized and initiated with their gift of $45,000.
As the work progressed, the demands for research facilities blossomed and ultimately became so great that they over-taxed the financial resources of the Club. The big job needed a public appeal for funds.
Variety Club leaders met and decided that such an appeal must be made in a dramatic and colorful manner. One offered to go after time on a national radio show. Another volunteered to see if the then league-leading Boston Braves would assist.
The approach to the Braves was made through Bill Sullivan, the club’s publicity director, former publicity chief for football genius Frank Leahy at Boston College and Notre Dame University. Sullivan relayed the request to Braves President Louis R. Perini and was told to pledge the support of the Braves to any undertaking that would help such a worthy cause.
When asked for time on his "Truth or Consequences" radio program, Ralph Edwards promised he would air an appeal for funds, if, between the Braves and the Variety Club, someone could come up with an idea that would dramatize the problem and hold the interest of his vast audience.
About that time, at the Children’s Hospital, there was a young patient, who was an enthusiastic follower of the Braves. Here was a natural for the Edwards show. A surprise visit by the stars of the Braves to the bedside of this cancer-stricken youngster, the meeting to be broadcast during the "Truth or Consequences" program on a coming Saturday night. Then came the problem of hiding the boy’s identity and keeping from him the nature of his own illness.
The doctors hurdled this one by explaining to the bedridden youngster that he had been selected to be an actor in a radio play, an actor who would represent all his sick pals on the Hospital. An actor must have a name, though. How about Jimmy? That was it. The ball players would visit one of their fans named Jimmy.
On went the show. Edwards opened by telling his audience, over a circuit closed to Jimmy so he could not hear what was being said, that they would be ear-witnesses to what went on when a group of major league ball players paid a surprise visit to the bedside of a 12-year old boy afflicted with cancer at the Children’s Hospital in Boston.
He then cut his circuit into Jimmy’s room while Billy Southworth, then the Braves manager, led his hulking, nervous players to the bedside. Jimmy was hardly able to speak when he was introduced to his idols who presented him with baseballs autographed by every member of the squad, a bat, and a fielder’s glove. Southworth climaxed the visit by inviting the happy youngster to see his favorites in action at Braves Field the next day and promised him they would win for him if he came.
Edwards made a plea for funds and there was delivered to the Hospital that night by people who heard the broadcast on their automobile radios, and by mail in the next few days, about $16,000.
The day after the broadcast, Jimmy, attended by nurses, was permitted to attend the double-header between the Braves and the Chicago Cubs. True to the promise, the Braves won two games for the sick boy, coming from behind to do so in both contests.
To help sustain interest in the campaign and to swell contributions, Jim Britt, one of the country’s top sportscasters, with the blessings of his sponsors, added the Jimmy story to his usual between game remarks. Braves President Perini also went on the air and told the thousands of listeners of the New England baseball network that the fight against cancer was dear to him because his father had died of that disease. Returns from this effort continued to pour in for the balance of the summer.
Then, one day, Britt received a telegram from Gardner, Massachusetts, the furniture manufacturing center, 55 miles from Boston. Some of the residents of that city heard the Jimmy story and wanted to do something to help. They had planned a "Day" for Jimmy but could the Braves send a couple of representatives? Britt and Sullivan went and brought with them peppery Eddie Stanky, star second baseman, who told the Jimmy story to the crowd that had gathered in front of city hall. He also auctioned off baseballs. In addition, voluntary donations were made. The first Jimmy Day was a bang-up success, netting more than $500. 
On the trip back to Boston Britt and Sullivan decided that if one community could sponsor such a profitable demonstration, others could do the same. They lost no time in asking then Governor Robert F. Bradford to issue a proclamation designating the first Saturday in June as state-wide Jimmy Day and urging all the Commonwealth’s cities and towns to participate. This the Governor did gladly.
Not alone from the Bay State but from all sections of New England came promises of cooperation. And, for the first time in history, a major league baseball team found itself in the business of spearheading a charitable enterprise. Everyone in the Braves organization participated. Burly catchers, umpire-baiting outfielders, pitchers who went on to win 20 games that season, in fact every member of the pennant-champions-to-be, down to the batboy, attended as many Jimmy celebrations as the schedule would permit.
Popular baseball player Tommy Holmes made a total of nine appearances for Jimmy in one week. So interested did he become in the work of the Cancer Research Foundation that he was appointed a trustee.
When the returns were counted from the various Jimmy Day activities, $126,000 was in the till to fight cancer in children and the Jimmy Fund was definitely in business. Receipts from the Variety Club and other activities boosted the first year’s total to $233,000.
In 1949, the Governors of the six New England states proclaimed a Jimmy Day, and this is now an annual practice. That year Martin J. Mullin, a prominent New England motion picture executive, became co-chairman of the Fund with Perini, and 565 movie houses joined with the Braves and Variety Club, in an all-out money-raising effort. In almost every theater from Portland, Maine to Hartford, Connecticut, there was shown a movie short on the work of the Children’s Cancer Research Foundation. Aisle collections for the Jimmy Fund were made during intermissions and the total that year reached $351,000. In 1950, $431,000 was raised, and last year another substantial sum running into the hundreds of thousands was given to the Fund.
There are few large gifts to the Fund. Most donations are for pennies, nickels, dimes, and quarters. Youngsters play such a leading role in the money-raising effort that bankers have estimated that at the peak of the campaign about 50 per cent of all the pennies in New England are tied up in thousands of Jimmy Fund banks made in the shape of baseballs and distributed across the six-state area.
Although most of the money is raised during the period that the trustees select for the drive, a substantial sum comes in all the year round. Recently, for instance, Warren Spahn, the Braves great left-handed pitcher, with Britt, went to Plymouth, Massachusetts, to accept a gift for the Fund of $1000 from the graduating class of the high school in that historic town. This was the result of small gifts the seniors had been storing in the class treasury for a year.
During the campaign the Braves publicity department and the office of Bill Koster, executive director of the Variety Club of New England, look like second-hand stores, piled high with every conceivable kind of container filled with coins and such incidental gifts as table linens, hand-made shawls and home-made lamps – gifts in many cases of those who cannot afford to donate money. These are auctioned off on television during a ball game and the proceeds go to the Fund.
With about $200,000 a year out of the Fund earmarked for research, Doctor Farber has been able to accelerate that program by using a well-balanced "team" of scientists skilled in the techniques of chemistry, physics, and biology, as well as medical science. With this money he has also been able to put into practice the "total care" concept he has long advocated.
The "team" has already discovered the effectiveness of aminopterin and related anti-folic compounds that have prolonged the lives of children with acute leukemia from the weeks and months up to two and one-half years – and still going. It has come up with a whole new series of compounds that have temporarily affected many other kinds of cancer and has synthesized more than 100 such compounds that are of interest in the huge experimental program.
There is a proud look in Doctor Farber’s eyes when he mentions the "team." "It is the most effective approach to the problem," he says.
At any one time, between 140 and 150 patients with widespread cancer, from week-old infants to children of 14, many from long distances, are now receiving what Doctor Farber calls "total care."
It includes the application of all the techniques of medicine and surgery for the comfort, well-being, and prolongation of the life of the patient with advanced cancer.
In "total care" attention is first given to a patient’s social and economic problems and to the mental peace of the family. Efforts are made to adjust the patient to his problems. Finally, it includes the administration of newly discovered chemicals, hormones, or physical agents for the good of the patient, and not primarily for research, as soon as possible after careful study in the laboratory.
"For a patient and his family the results of such care are beyond description," says Doctor Farber. "’Total care’ of the patient with advanced cancer can only be given by a group of doctors and nurses representing the several areas of medicine, surgery, and laboratory science working together as a well-organized ‘team’."
Because the "total care" of children with cancer demands so much more professional and laboratory service than is usually the case with ordinary illnesses, it would be beyond the reach of most parents of children with cancer. Foundation doctors, therefore, do everything required for the good of the patient without regard to the ability of the parents to pay. In the last five years alone, the doctors of the Children’s Cancer Research Foundation have had the responsibility for the care and treatment by new chemical means of almost 1000 young patients with cancer incurable by surgery or irradiation.
If all of the care given to the children treated in the Chemotherapy Division of the Foundation could be paid for by the parents of these children at private rates, the sum would be equal to better than half of what the Jimmy Fund raised last year for the support of the entire Children’s Cancer Research Foundation.
Not all of the patients can get to Boston, however. In these cases doctors from all over the world send to the Foundation x-ray plates and microscopic sections and they get, in return, without charge, a diagnosis of the case and recommendations for treatment. This service, now supported by the Foundation, was begun by the Boston doctors five years ago with the help of the National Cancer Institute of the United States Public Health Service.
Many of the standard hospital regulations have been altered in the new Jimmy Fund Building. Parents may come to visit their seriously ill youngsters any hour of the day or night. Instead of the usual drab hospital surroundings, child patients live in an atmosphere that is bright and gay. Wallpaper is gaily colored and decorated with scenes from famous nursery rhymes.
Parents often boast to friends or relatives that their child has as many as ten doctors in attendance. The doctors of the "team" make regular rounds of their patients, their pockets filled with lollipops, an event eagerly awaited by their charges. The doctors call them their "secret weapons."
For a long time the work was carried on in a sprawling network of twenty installations, even including the first floor of an apartment house as least 300 yards away from the director’s office.
Because such facilities became inadequate, the trustees voted to build the first cancer research center in the world.
They did this even though the substantial annual expenditure for research – white mice for experiments alone cost in the neighborhood of $10,000 a year – left less than one third of the cost of the new building. They took the risk because of their faith in the warm-hearted generosity of the everyday people of New England.
With a small down payment and a large mortgage the building was started a year ago last July. It is now completed, furnished with the most modern equipment in the world, at a cost of $1,500,000. It consists of a ground floor and four stories and is so constructed that three additional stories may be added when necessary.
There are no beds in the new building. Patients who require hospitalization will be cared for in the wards assigned for that purpose in the Children’s Hospital across the street, connected to the Jimmy Building by a bridge. The entire facilities are for research and education. There is an out-patient chemotherapy clinic, a recreational area and a lecture room.
It is the world center for the dissemination of knowledge concerning cancer in children. It offers without a charge, a greatly expanded consultation service to any doctor in the world who will send in histories, x-rays films, and microscopic slides.
"The future is bright," Doctor Farber said in an address at the opening of the new Cancer Institute of the New England Deaconess Hospital, Boston, recently established under the direction of the famed scientist, Dr. Shields Warren.
"On the basis of what has been accomplished optimism is permissible even in areas yesterday regarded as hopeless."
"Let us speak, therefore, of cancer as a group of disorders to be studied, investigated, and treated as though we were speaking of tuberculosis, pneumonia, or the several forms of meningitis. On such a basis it is permissible to conclude, when we measure the problem of cancer, that this scourge too will vanish from the earth."
Oh, yes! Jimmy is very much alive and back with his family. He is six feet three inches tall and has become quite a ballplayer.
